---
title: "A bit more on task trees"
summary: "So as a task fleshes out from an abstraction to a reality, there is a hierarchical, recursive process of stating a goal, defining some limits on accep"
date: "2014-11-07"
draft: true
---

So as a task fleshes out from an abstraction to a reality, there is a hierarchical, recursive process of stating a goal, defining some limits on acceptable outcomes, finding real-world examples, extracting information from them, and synthesizing sub-goals based on that information.

If your goal is "learn to play guitar well":

You look for examples of people who play guitar to define what is and is not "playing guitar well."  This might include instructors.  If you think your instructor isn't very good, you will use that information to determine what you want to do differently.  But your judgement of that must have come from comparison to some other guitar player who you think is better.

You look at examples of guitars, and through constrasting them, and decide what details you deem necessary in a guitar.  If you read an article that gives tips on the advantages of one guitar over another, then that person was the one who did the comparison.

Once you have a guitar, your ideas of sufficiency for a good guitar player will determine which songs you decide to learn.  As you practice, you will contrast what you're playing with what the recorded song sounds like.

When you develop an internal concept of something, it basically guides your attention to a detail.  The concept of low action versus high action may never enter someones mind if they've never played a guitar.  But if they play enough guitars, even if they never learn a word for it, they will likely create an internal concept for it.

Words allow us to share internal concepts, but they also guide their creation.  A parent who says "that's grass" and "that's a flower" is guiding their child's attention to a contrast.  The fact that there are different words for something indicates to the child that they should look for differences.

But when the word is taken totally from instantiated context, it cannot be fully understood and used to anticipate lower-level consequences.  So if you tell someone who is buying their first guitar to check whether it has high or low action, they won't know which one to pick.  The consequences will have to be laid out for them because they don't know what they don't know.

But, when the consequences aren't real, they also aren't trusted.  So when kids become teenagers, they start not listening to authority because they haven't had many examples of real-world consequences.  As they mature, they gain more fleshed-out examples of what happens when you do certain things, and they are better able to truly anticipate what a likely outcome will be.

Back to task hierarchies with this:

This is essentially why expertise is important.  It takes time to learn.  Information can flow at the speed of light, yet it takes time to learn, because nothing is learned unless there is enough real world experience to understand lower-level consequences.

So when you have a more abstract idea, it takes much longer to be realized because more trips are required through this hierarchical recursive sequence.

The time it takes will be proportional to: the tolerances of sufficiency in defining the task, the amount of options to select though, the physical size of the project, and the physical size of the entity doing the project.  When cycling through a hierarchical recursive sequence, many variables that differ between steps would be averaged out, and could be treated as constant for modelling purposes.