---
title: "A Pseudo Marxist Apologia Of The"
date: "2024-12-30"
draft: false
---

First, let me say, I’m not a Marxist, so the title is kind of clickbait. That said, I do believe that material conditions—or as modern economists would call them, “incentives”—drive people’s beliefs, and they do drive history. I just think Marxism is missing a big detail which is intra-institution incentives. [Here’s a longer explanation.](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/theories-of-historical-change)

### A look at the material conditions of the Ruling Class

Let’s imagine you’re a Pharaoh in Egypt in 4000BC. Are you the driver of history? The statues we recover would seem to indicate you are. But let’s dig a little and look into the incentive structure you’re facing.

If you believe Julian Jaynes’ theory of the bicameral mind, then you’re hallucinating the voice of your ancestors telling you to irrigate more fields near Memphis. If not, then at the very least you believe you have some connection to the gods, or suspect you might. You have some representation in your brain of the gods, and you likely have been taught to introject their attitudes into your decision-making process.  
  
But those aren’t the only entities affecting your decision-making. You also are surrounded by family members, some of whom are vying for your position. If you’re lucky maybe you have a few benevolent family members who are capable of sincerity, but they’re all growing up around the same games, so it’s kind of unlikely. For the most part, you don’t get to participate in normal family life. But what can you do about that? It’s all you’ve known, so you don’t realize how strange it is that your uncle is probably plotting to kill you.

Let’s imagine a completely selfish Pharaoh, with no regard for their people. Why do they not just tax almost everything from people, amass wealth for themselves, and kill anyone who objects? Why bother directing irrigation? If you can truly do what you want? Well, immediately your advisors are going to start complaining to you. You can have them killed, but they will be replaced. You can do that, and maybe even find an advisor who will pretend everything is fine. But then the people of Memphis are going to at some point stop sending the beer jars. You might be able to bribe the soldiers to suppress the people and take the jars by force, but eventually you run out of resources to bribe them with. If there’s another kingdom next door, then they’re going to be offering the people of Memphis a better deal. If not, maybe a local leader will be doing it. The point is - the Pharaoh doesn’t have complete freedom. They have freedom of choice, but their incentives constrain the realistic modes of behavior.

Let’s go further back.. you’re on the Caucasian Steppe 50,000 years ago. You’re surrounded by villages that are mostly doing a small amount of farming. Suddenly a group of raiders appear from over a hill on horses with bows. They start shooting people. They say “we’ll leave you alone but you have to send 1/2 your grain to us a few mountains over.” OK. 1 year later another group comes and says “you have to give us 2/3 of your grain.” So you send a messenger to the first group and say “hey these guys just came to steal our grain, you want to come fight them?” 1 year later another group comes and says “you have to give us 1/3 of your grain.” Are you sending a messenger over to the other mountains this time? Or are you saying “alright, let’s do this” and digging in with them? In this way there’s competition among these extortionists.  
  
From the beginning there’s been pressure on the ruling class to exert discipline and not take more than they should. In the case of a long-lasting hereditary monarchy, these lessons can be passed down, so the daily life of a subject can actually benefit from this arrangement because no longer do they have to spend their own resources defending their land from raiders. They can live in relative harmony with their neighbors and not worry about getting Littlefingered by their uncle. Yes, they’re getting taxed and there their behavior is constrained, but the competition among the other potential extortionists establishes a sort of going rate for this arrangement. There will be times when their margins are pretty thin… where there are lots of other raiders, but they’re also not able to extract much. Poor guys.

Now let’s fast forward to today. We don’t have Pharaohs. And things are a little different in that our ruling class actually doesn’t directly run the government. The ruling class merely control the government through campaign donations and lobbying. But they similarly face competition and pressure. They’re often getting Littlefingered by their uncles in some milder form, as evident by the strange family dynamics. But they don’t have their gods, nor do they mostly have wisdom passed down for generations that can teach them to have some discipline about how much they extract. They also don’t have the constant threat of violence that existed before. But neither do we, so things have gotten better and worse for them, just as they have for us.

As thin as capitalism is stretching us, it is also stretching them. Their incentives aren’t driven by money, they’re driven by status games. Our institutions are designed to extract as much of our time and energy as possible from us. They’re doing a hell of a job lately. For us this happens because we’re competing with other workers, corporations are lobbying our government to dismantle what’s left of our social safety net, so if we let up, we eventually end up homeless.

While billionaires’ and their families don’t face quite those pressures, they do face some. For one, the only thing really preventing them from making horrible decisions is themselves. Drug abuse and mental disorders are rampant among them and their families. They have trouble forming real connections because they’re orbited by people who only want their money. They can buy some $200k car an not enjoy it at all. They’re surrounded by soothesayers and wormtongues who tell them what they want to hear, so the only way they can orient themselves in reality is through extreme intention.

Not only that, but they have to go through life in a very careful manner. I have a vegan friend who once lamented that we’re probably destroying crayfish homes while walking through a creek. He’s right, we probably were. We’re a lot bigger. The thing is, wealth is essentially the same. Lennie killed Curley’s wife in _Of Mice and Men_… it wasn’t on purpose, he had strength he didn’t know. A billionaire can incentivize someone to kill themselves, or kill others, or spend their whole lives grinding away for nothing, with a tiny fraction of their wealth. Their wealth is strength. It’s literally potential energy. People are basically crayfish to them, and in order to \*not\* be assholes, they have to be extremely careful. I think this is why Jesus said “it’s easier for a rich man to pass through the eye of a needle than to enter the kingdom of heaven.” It’s not an attack. It’s a statement of fact. Destroying someone’s life will send you to hell if there is one. And for the filthy rich, avoiding that’s as difficult as avoiding destroying a crayfish home.

The billionaires’ behavior is also more and more constrained by capitalism. As they start getting directly involved in geopolitics, they are putting themselves more directly in the line of fire. They’re tying themselves more closely to the consequences of their actions. Bill Gates got pied in the face in the 90’s. People didn’t like his monopolistic tactics about web browsers. As harmless as that is, if I were walking down the street and a stranger knew who I was and hated me enough to humiliate me like that, it would definitely change the way I think. It would have a significant emotional impact.

But Bill Gates was basically left alone. He had to do some maneuvering to avoid Microsoft being dismantled through anti-trust laws, but I’m sure he was able to enjoy more than his fair share of his wealth on Epstein Island. Similarly the average family in the US in the 90’s was able to mostly enjoy life with their kids watching cartoons on Saturday, buying a reasonably affordable house, etc.

Musk on the other hand is under constant legal and social pressure. His life in some ways reminds me in a way of the hipster kids after the 2008 crash. Sort of these emotionally troubled desperate attempt to eke out some pleasure mixed with constant dog-fighting with reality. From the outside it seems erratic behavior with unforced errors, as did a lot of the things the hipster kids were doing. But from the inside, it was a wild mash of local incentives combined with future discounting and an extreme dearth of dopamine through everyday life. That’s what happens when institutions overly-constrain our behavior.

### Where Marxism Falls Short

Marxism and modern economics / political science / game theory are really the only widespread theories that do acknowledge the fundamental nature of incentives in driving behavior. Economics tends to stay mute on the subject of beliefs and politics, though because those topics aren’t paying the economists’ bills.

There are some more obscure topics that touch upon the topics, but I’m not sure they’re fleshed out enough to be considered full-fledged fields: Ostrom’s work with common pool resources, Cryptoeconomics and the analysis of incentives, mechanism design, as well as cybernetic game theory, which has been getting studied through the lens of category theory in an interesting development. For my own part, I haven’t really studied the latter enough to definitively espouse it. I think it’s on the right track, but I believe the most fruitful thing will be to bring in [thermodynamics](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/institutions-as-emergent-computational) and [statistical mechanics](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/mutual-constraint-as-internal-energy) as well. However, I think anything with the label “cybernetics” will have trouble gaining traction, so it will probably be rebranded and laundered through another field in 20 years.

Marxism focuses on the material conditions of the “proletariat”, who it essentially views as an unorganized mass of agents who have incentive vectors that are opposed to the incentive vectors of the PMC and ruling elite. It has this idea of a “lumpenproletariat” or basically proletariat who don’t know what’s good for them, which I think is patronizing and stupid. It also views religion as inherently counterproductive, which I think is demonstrably nonsensical because billions of people don’t contribute significant time and energy to institutions over thousands of years if they’re not getting something out of it. A central principle to my thermodynamics of institutions is the idea that people relatively quickly (compared to the life of an institution) determine whether they’re getting a raw deal from participating in an institution and change behavior accordingly. This means that an institution’s energetic existence isn’t co-terminal with the people who make it up. If people stop carrying out the code of the institution, it dies.

### What to do about any of it

The fact is, we’re all in the same boat. Billionaires are just as trapped by their incentives as the proletariat. Class warfare may sound cathartic but it’s not getting anyone anywhere.

We’ve got to throw a bone to the CEO’s. While it sucks that they get to play games with our lives, they also essentially become shells of people in the process, and that’s not what they want. Musk wants to be able to walk into a bar in rural IN and get a pat on the back like he’s a character in Cheers. I believe he genuinely wants to improve people’s lives, he just doesn’t have the information, and his incentives are all screwed up.

What will actually do something is designing new institutions with new institutional incentives. These institutions \*must\* compete with current institutions on their own terms. Charity is an unstable equilibrium. Specifically, IMO, we need to design institutions that involve more equity in terms of distribution of returns, as well as in decision-making processes. In order for such institutions to compete with current institutions on their own terms, we need a massive scaling in the speed at which collective decisions can be made.

No “progressive stack” or snapping or whatever. I’m pissed off just thinking about it. The best technology for this actually comes from open source software development. Git. Maintain a current state of the institution, changes to the institution require approvals, which can be granted asynchronously. If you can encode all the institutional policies in terms of some kind of institutional code, then you can represent all policy change proposals as pull requests. You can merge to main as quickly as people can approve. No huge discussions needed. If the policies are directly represented as code, no room for misinterpretation either.

In my opinion the process is the product. If we want a society with more peace and equity, the process of creating it will require that as well. Why? Because a change process requires institutions, and the institution that is set up to drive the change will have a certain mode of incentivizing people to act on its behalf. If that mode of incentivizing is violent in the beginning, it will be violent later.