---
title: "Abstraction and human programs"
summary: "In this post from a while back, I mentioned a group dynamic that result in a difference between the internal and external structure of the group. Esse"
date: "2018-07-10"
draft: true
---

[In this post from a while back](http://spacechimplifecom.local/2017/02/05/subtraction-as-abstraction/), I mentioned a group dynamic that result in a difference between the internal and external structure of the group. Essentially you can view the 2 political parties of the US as vectors in a policy or idea space. Many people have nuanced political opinions, but when you average them out, they tend to form a bimodal distribution along many of those policy dimensions. These groups can be subdivided into groups of arbitrary resolution. But at the scale of political party in the US, these parties manage to oppose each other on essentially every issue that consumes the national dialogue. I'm guessing there is some game-theoretical explanation for it, but regardless, it serves as a point of discussion for information and boundaries. Most people outside the US don't pay attention to the struggles between the Democrats and Republicans. All they see is the sum of the 2 policy vectors. As stated, they are almost completely diametrically opposed on every issue that consumes the national dialogue, however, the result is that from a foreign perspective the actual effects of our US policies are essentially independent of anything in the national dialogue. One thing that both parties have in common is supporting decreased labor protections in other countries. This is the sum of the 2 vectors, and yet it is essentially nonexistent in our national political dialogue.

In this way, the information that is being acted on within our group, versus outside is at least a little different, and potentially totally unrelated. Similarly, within a cell, there is a sealing off of the internals of the cell to some extent. Messages are passed through receptors which will always have some causal distance to the referent. This message must be encoded in some sort of channel, and this channel has properties that can be analyzed via information theory... the same information theory that is being used in quantum computing.

This information can clearly have causal effects and consequences. The question is always "how?" We can use programming, statistics, and thermodynamics to analyze the behavior of a group. Rather than regular computation, where each operation must return a 1 or a 0, we can think of multiple programs running on the whole population, running at different levels of efficiency, where the channel capacity is potentially a measure of the power of the program.

The programs are our policies that make up our society. These can be as explicit as our laws that are written down, or they can be more implicit, like our tendency to shame people who don't maintain an acceptable level of hygiene. The laws which are explicit are designed to be carried out with minimal error, and so come with checks and error correction. However there are perhaps many more subtler programs that maybe are not executed with the accuracy of the more explicit policies, but are executed more quickly and more definitively. The dynamics leading to a lynch mob are an example, or increasing hostilities leading up to a war.

I've previously discussed the programmatic nature of our society where it is explicit: in our laws, however, that inherently requires an outside enforcement mechanism... it is a "cooperative game." What are some of the simplest operations that could run on a collection of minds?

This is a bit difficult because these operations will be quantum operations, not classical boolean ones. Societies and quantum states use a lot of the same continuous logic. Some work has been done applying Hamiltonian mechanics to game theory, and this is essentially where dynamics will have to be fleshed out.

So we need to understand the equilibria of games, combined with the abstraction via subtraction--which is a window to a continuous transition from non-cooperative to cooperative games. Based on the fidelity of the program, we can make an estimate of the channel capacity, which will then allow us to make an estimate of the amount of work that can be done through that program.