---
title: "Animal Phenomenology"
summary: "I read a comment on the internet a while back that took as a base assumption that fish can't feel pain. To me this is such a silly question. They beha"
date: "2018-02-09"
draft: true
---

I read a comment on the internet a while back that took as a base assumption that fish can't feel pain. To me this is such a silly question. They behave as if they feel pain. Their brain structures contain the areas we associate with pain. What possible scientific reason do we have to doubt that they feel pain? If anything, I would think based on what we know of neuroscience, we should think that they feel it more intensely, as it takes up a larger proportion of their brains. But that comment seemed to be popular, and my response was mostly ignored. This is a common pattern. Someone also thought it was inappropriately anthopomorphosizing a rabbit to say that they were experiencing contentment.
In a recent thread on the Vancouver aquarium, people are in awe at how intelligent dolphins seem to be. When most of their "intelligent" behavior could also just be viewed as a sign of cooperation. Or counterfactually animals that seem stupid could just be viewed as being uncooperative. This would mean that in order to understand them, we should gain their trust and attempt to cooperate, rather than just capture them and take them apart.
To me it seems that the main arguments against animal intelligence are:
They don't have language or cities or art
Their brains are different
"Of course we're smarter"
Animals live in different environments where the benefits of cooperation or communication are less than the costs, so they focus their conscious efforts on other things. If an animal lives in a situation where it does not benefit from cooperation, what good does language do it? We assume that we have language because we are more intelligent, but to me it seems that animals develop language to the extent that they cooperate. So bees dance and crows have names for each other, and monkeys have calls.
We know from game theory that 2 agents can forgo a potential shared benefit if they gain more in the short term by not cooperating. But they all have the capacity for at least some cooperation. Of course animals that have been cooperating for thousands of years will have more of a tendency to do that with humans, and animals that have fought with everything for thousands of years will be very wary for a long time. But they all have some capacity to cooperate and communicate on some level.
So they don't have cities and art because they never have had a good reason to work together long enough to develop that sort of capacity. However I would hypothesize that if you could create a game-theoretical situation where cooperation was incentivized between rats, soon they would develop their communication skills and if it went on long enough they would develop rat art and rat culture. We can see from the birds of paradise that when resources are not super-scarce animals tend to develop hyper-specific flourishes. To me that represents and increase in the complexity of communication, rather than purely an accident of peak-shift like some biologists think.
As for the brain differences:
Some of the most intelligent animals have completely different brain structures. Birds lack the most important parts of the human brain--the part we most closely study in association with our own intelligence. And yet, we see clearly intelligent behavior in crows, parrots, etc. Octopuses and cuttlefish have even more divergent brain structures, and yet show intelligent behavior. Even bees, which barely have brains, can learn to use tools and teach each other. So we have no reason to assume brain structure is the limiting factor in intelligence.
But even if we did, all mammals have the same brain parts we do. They are different sizes, but all the main parts are pretty much there. So at least we should assume all mammals have the capacity to occupy any mental state that we do.
We have no real definition or understanding of consciousness. All we have is assessments of neural activity in various brain areas, but we still have yet to really understand how that translates to goal oriented behavior. We see that animals engage in goal directed behavior. To me it seems like people are running through all sorts of mental gymnastics to discount animals' levels of consciousness.
Obviously #3 is not a valid logical argument. Maybe it's true, but we should define how it's true. That's what I mean when I say the burden of proof should be on those saying animals are less intelligent than humans. When we're trying to understand stars, we assume they're all the same and then figure out how they're different. Whereas we assume black holes and nebulas are totally different, even though physically there's a continuous boundary among them. If we want to understand consciousness, we should assume we're all the same and define how we're different, because we've been doing the other thing forever and it's run its course on helping us understand intelligence.