---
title: "B14"
date: ""
draft: true
---

### Phase 1 (Platform):

The creation of a for-profit platform which relies on the technology of treating policies as directly executable code, allowing policies to be implemented in a way that doesn’t leave so much room for misinterpretation.

The platform should have the following properties:

*   People can submit proposals, collaboratively edit them, and vote to approve them.
    
*   People or groups can be assigned instructions as a result of policies.
    
*   People can collectively define triggers that run certain procedures in certain circumstances.
    
*   The platform should be open source
    
*   The platform should encourage discussion and engagement, like social media.
    

Why for profit? Because things that don’t make a profit in this world have 0 chance of contending with the waves that existing big players make. People aren’t going to fund a party from the ground up to the required level as a charity. Also, the platform isn’t going to build itself. An engine is necessary for a significant movement, not just a handful of people’s individual efforts.

### Phase 2 (Gig Co-op):

Once this for-profit platform is created, it should then be used to manage itself in a cooperative way. It can do this by being a gig-worker-owned gig work platform.

Why co-op? This serves 2 purposes. First, it does what the platform is designed to do: increase people’s voice. Second, it provides a way to test and scale the usability of the platform internally, as well as various governance concepts. The profit and gig work aspects allow there to be actual stakes.

Why gig work? Because it allows the platform to outsource operational aspects of hte platform to 3rd parties in a way that can be collectively decided on in a fine-grained way. This means in theory the platform could reach a truly decentralized state where no single party has existential control over the platform.