---
title: "Behavioral independence"
summary: "Why is it worthwhile to think about this? People are constantly striving to \"change the system.\" Clearly, it is not working very well. However, there "
date: "2014-06-05"
---

Why is it worthwhile to think about this?  People are constantly striving to "change the system."  Clearly, it is not working very well.  However, there are very few resources dedicated to understanding it.  Of course, there is research money for economics, anthropology, psychology, etc.  But what actually ends up getting funded is a product of the system itself.  Papers with the highest potential for actionable, short-term gain tend to be promoted.  Papers which do not question established frameworks are promoted (of course--those doing the peer-reviewing as well as a paper's author have made their careers off of the common ground that a field shares).

It is important to distinguish between criticism and description.  I do not have a particularly negative overall opinion of that system.  It allows people to work together to flesh out ideas based on common assumptions, and leads to drastically more progress than if individuals each worked on their own ideas and didn't contribute to a common framework.  Everything has strengths and weaknesses and is appropriate in different times and situations.  The point is that I am ascribing no moral value to what I'm saying, I'm just calling it like I see it in an attempt to develop a more effective quantitative model of social behavior.

So what do I see?  I see that everyone in "the system" is locked into certain sets of behavior.  I don't think anyone is sitting there plotting ways to screw other people over.  At least that's not how they see it in their heads.  The behavior of an institution is almost wholly independent of any one person involved.

How does that work?  If people are the ones involved in these institutions, how could their decisions not have an impact?  If an employee of a company is not willing to behave a certain way, they will be fired and another person hired.  Consider a contract killing.  Most people would refuse this kind of work.  But, given enough resources, a company will be able to find someone to carry this out, in spite of the risks.  A CEO who is not willing to make the decisions necessary to act in the interest of the board can be replaced.  A king who is not acting in the interest of his kingdom can be replaced (and his guards might have little incentive to stop it).

Imagine a molecule-- it is made up of bonds and atoms.  Take, for instance, a water molecule.  We generally presume that the 2 hydrogens and the oxygen in the molecule are the same, and that the electrons orbiting the molecule are the same.  They are if you don't pay attention to the fact that time is involved.  In any practical situation where there is water, some of it generally dissociates in to H+ and OH-.  The molecule could easily have each individual atom replaced within microseconds.  Same with its electrons, and perhaps even the nuclei of the atoms (and the quarks making up those nuclear constituents).

So are the systems in our body able to treat a molecule as stable?  How can our body use water to do work?  It's because the speed with which that role is filled is much faster than the speed that the system collapses in the absence of that particular individual.

So the "system" could be compared to a network of molecules.  If a hydrogen suddenly gets knocked off of a dna molecule, what happens to the gene? the cell? the body?  The higher the scale, the less likelihood of effect because the inertia of that system is so much greater than that of the individual.  This is dependent on the presumption that it exists in a solution with plenty of hydrogen.

The DNA molecule will very likely continue serving its purpose independently of any one constituent.  Similarly, an institution will continue serving its function--within the great network of institutions that is a society--independently of any one human.  In this way, institutions behave wholly independently from humans.  They act on a different scale.  Of course, a lot of this has been established before.

Perhaps certain transactions can be modeled as rate equations, and perhaps deeper parallels can be drawn for that matter.  How about activation energy as a metaphor for the cost of a transaction?  Infrastructure as catalysis?

And this can cause social change by looking at the way our institutions are set up, and finding ways to change that.  As of now, people have been trying to effect progress through pre-established channels such as voting, lobbying the government, NGOs, and protests.  Despite that, we have only gotten further along in the waste of natural resources, income inequality, and the deterioration of the human psyche.

By understanding our institutions and the underlying mechanisms that have locked us into our current trajectory, we can design a way to get us out.

What does an institution need?  It needs individuals acting on its behalf.  It needs a method of incentivizing those individuals to continue acting on its behalf.  The individuals doing the acting need resources.  Thus the standard mechanism of incentive for an institution is to collect resources and distribute them among the individuals who make it up.  An institution needs a method of acquiring new members.  In order for new members to be integrated into the institution, investment is required.  For a company, this is training.  For a family, this is giving kids food and telling them how to act.  For society, it is integration into the labor force (i.e. education).  Even after the initial investment, it is required that the institution provide incentive for an individual to continue being a productive member.  This can be done in several ways that break down into 2 basic categories: positive and negative feedback.  Not only must these incentives exist, but they must be communicated.  They are communicated through the media and narrative.  Religion is the most obvious example of how this works.  There are stories written down that are passed on and they have moral messages.  At the time that they were written, the behaviors that they promoted must have been effective, because if they weren't, they would have died out.  A society with a narrative more effective at promoting survival of its members and itself (i.e. one which could extract more work from its members) would tend to take over.

Luckily, as a world, we are getting beyond basic survival-of-the-fittest social darwinism, which promotes greed, aggression, and cruelty.  Societies which tend to cooperate can flourish.  Think of the birds of paradise.  There are so few predators of them in the rainforest that natural selection is not the primary driver of their genetic variation.  Instead, sexual selection drives their competition.  They do not fight to the death.  Instead, they exhibit dramatic variation and specialization of behavior and appearance, which then drives the direction of their evolution.

Think of South Korea, which made a nationally conscious decision to specialize in ship-building production.  They nationally invested heavily and became the world leader in the industry, and it brought their country resources which they invested in technology production and education.  China took after them and, having a more centralized government and top-down chain of command was able to invest more.  They have taken over because they further specialized.  They built small and medium-sized ships in response to the global financial crisis, where companies needed the ability to make smaller capital investments.  The market was split in 2.

This is not violent competition.  And, in fact, per capita, South Korea still has a larger share of the market.

What was required for that society to produce that behavior?  The same thing that is required for any organism to produce such behavior.  It sensed a potential to gain resources.  It used that processed that sensory data into a behvioral plan, and it drove systems to enact that plan.

[Representation and Behavior](http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/representation-and-behavior), off the MIT press, discusses what is required for anticipatory behavior in its investigation into robotic behavior.  It provides a framework for analyzing the integration of disparate bits of information into internal representations, manipulation of those representations into behavioral mechanisms, and translations of those mechanisms back into smaller-scale discrete actions that together result in carrying out a behavior.  This same framework can apply to institutional behavior.

Foucault's analysis of "biopower" as techonologies for subjugating bodies reflects only one side of institutional control of human behavior.  There are institutional technologies for gathering information to sense opportunities to gain resources for itself (and therefore its members), and there are institutional technologies for promoting certain behaviors.  These technologies can use negative feedback (threat of deprivation of resources or rewards) or positive feedback (promise of extra resources or rewards) to promote the behaviors necessary for each step in the larger behavior.  Societies and institutions have developed their own technologies, and have recycled those technologies, and different combinations of those technologies.

Institutions and institutional behavior are inherent to the human condition.  In isolation, humans organize into systematically functioning groups.  Anarchy is not an equilibrious state for humans, because by combining resources, specializing in behavior, and pooling resources and work into the development of larger ventures, such as infrastructure, we can distribute risk, lower the cost of transactions, and develop better societal technologies that can allow us to acquire more resources.  A society that can organize itself to build a wall around its town can protect itself better against roving pillagers.  The societies which flourish are those which have rich internal organization in a way that promotes anticipatory behavior on all scales.

Societies die as well.  The tao te ching says that brittleness is a sign of death.  What is brittleness in an institution?  That will be for next time.