---
title: "Currency"
summary: "I think there is a major flaw in current popular economic thinking. There are some people who believe we should return to the gold standard, and there"
date: "2018-02-09"
draft: true
---

I think there is a major flaw in current popular economic thinking.  There are some people who believe we should return to the gold standard, and there are many people who are afraid that raising the minimum wage will cause inflation.  People are concerned by the fact that our nation runs on a fiat currency.  How is a dollar valuable if we can just print them whenever we need?

But I don't understand why the idea that currency should be backed by some tangible resource is any easier to digest.  If currency can take the form of shells, metal, paper, or magnetic sectors of a hard-drive, then it is clearly part of the realm of information.  And, while a tangible form allows you to better deceive yourself about its transience, it does not necessarily have any effect on its functional stability.

If currency is an element of information, just like a word, a bit on a computer, or a mathematical equation, then explaining its role in guiding our behavior would seem to be intertwined with the explanation of other informational phenomena, like language, math, logic, etc.  These are ways of organizing humans to behave in certain ways.  In other words, currency is one of the forces that drive the formation and dynamics of institutions.

However, it is not the primary medium of every kind of institution.  Religions, for instance, are driven by art and narrative.  The dynamics of families tend to be driven by action-oriented language production, emotions, and facial expressions.  Intra-firm dynamics are guided by titles.  Governments are guided by statutes and decrees.  Since all these institutions are dependent on interactions at different levels, and a society depends on a healthy ecosystem of institutions, it is difficult to tease apart the elements of a stream of information and determine what role it is playing, and at what level it is promoting organization.

So, at a basic level, in order to fully understand currency, we must place it in the context of forces guiding institutional interactions.  To tease apart the forces guiding institutional interactions, we must consider what it requires to exist.

Just like life is dependent upon elements recombining into molecules, which then serve functions within an organism, An institution requires humans to recombine into functional units.  A functional unit of multiple humans can create more complex behavior than individual humans.  One thing required for organization into a functional unit is specialization.

The way I use the word "specialization" is essentially complementarity of state along a certain dimension of interaction.  In an electron orbital, it is spin and orientation.  In an ionic bond it is charge--in a covalent bond, it is a complex stable interaction between charge and electron position.  At a higher scale, the dimensions of interactions fundamentally change and, while they are dependent on the lower level for their existence (i.e. structuralistically dependent), they are carried out along other dimensions, at different scales of time and space.  The forces which guide their interaction are the same, but the different scales of time and space result in a different combination of forces dominating the dynamics of behavior, resulting in a bifurcation.

In an institution, it is behavioral role.  There are many dimensions along which people can behave and states that can be occupied.  Within a firm, which is very hierarchically organized, there is superior-subordinate.  By maintaining this distinction, behavioral roles are created.  With this distinction, mutually acknowledged by either individual, the behavior of the two individuals is constrained.  Within the infinite space of possible states for either individual, there is a persistent asymmetry.  This asymmetry is a form of potential energy.

This difference between states tends towards 0.  Due to diffusion and entropy, such an asymmetry never lasts, but as it collapses, it releases energy by doing work in the form of behaviors (practically useful or not).  The student becomes the master, but only through behavior.  As the master delegates tasks to the student, the student gets practice.  If the student doesn't listen to the master, the difference in states is not high.  If the behaviors being performed are not of mutual benefit (known or unknown, direct or indirect), the relationship will tend not to exist.

These asymmetrical states are initial conditions.  The interaction itself consumes the asymmetry.  Subordinate and superior roles would not exist without some sort of gradient.  In most obvious institutions this gradient is resources, specifically money.

But if currency provides a gradient to promote work on an institution's behalf, how does it promote specialization?  If a firm is a currency saddle point that attracts individuals, the question is: by what mechanism does the attraction of individuals to the same stream of resources result in specialization?  The answer is that in order to drink from the same stream of water, two individuals must be relatively close in location.  If they are close in location, then they likely share many of the same states other than physical location alone, they will probably both be awake at the same time, they will both experience changes in weather at the same time, along with an infinte amount of other state alignments.  With so many state alignments, they will be repelled unless they exhibit state complementarity with enough magnitude (through amplitude or diversity of state differences) to counteract the alignments.  The only states involved are those within the dimensions along which they interact.  So if there is no social interaction, the only one that matters is whether they can physically fit next to each other to drink from the stream.  If they can't, they will reposition themselves so that they can, perhaps on other sides of the stream, or along the stream.  If they do interact socially, then the social states will have an effect.

A more pertinent example for social interaction would be profiting through arbitrage of a price differential in corn.  If 2 people or firms sense such a potential source of resources, they will have to divide the profits.  If they exhibit the same strategies (for instance, buying or selling on similar time-scales in similar quantities), they will be in competition.  One firm will have to find another stream of money, or eventually (as competition is an unstable equilibrium), be bled dry of resources.  However, if each firm exhibits different strategies, their degree of competition falls as the magnitude of their differences increases.  As their degree of competition falls, eventually it bifurcates into cooperation, where the equilibrium changes to an even split of profits.  Such a state difference requires work or asymmetrical initial conditions.  It is maintained by information.  If the 2 firms don't have an agreement, implicit or explicit, then they are not cooperating, and their interaction will devolve into competition.

If there are several firms involved, they will have to find further specializations.  When there are 2 firms involved, they can find specializations (complementary states) along 1 dimension.  The speculator and the safe-bet investor, for instance, would be specializing along the dimension of calculated risk of investment.  When more firms are involved, they will be in competition with one or the other along those dimensions, as they will have some position along that dimension, and it will be in one or the other's territory.  Thus in order to "drink from the same stream" in equilibrium, they must maintain a neutral state in that first dimension, and specialize along a 2nd dimension.  This will push both initial firms to either compete or cooperate along this new dimension of interaction.  Suppose the new firm specializes in computer-trading.. the existing firms can risk their existing resources in a tech-race, or they can find some complementarity by trading along longer time-scales than the algorithms work with, or using more complex information that requires contextual understanding to interpret.

The introduction of this 2nd dimension of interaction does more than add to the competition.. It also increases the number of possible states along which this competition or cooperation takes place.  In order for this 3rd firm to exist in equilibrium with the 1st two, The first two must merge together and bring the interaction back to 1 dimension (the new one), and cooperate from there, or more firms must join the fray and occupy states which will allow a more complex pattern of cooperation (or else compete).