---
title: "Degrees of freedom"
summary: "Any asymmetry is a gradient across which things can move. If you can observe it, that means it has some physical effect. \"Class\" is a concept which se"
date: "2015-05-02"
---

Any asymmetry is a gradient across which things can move.  If you can observe it, that means it has some physical effect.  "Class" is a concept which seems very difficult to put into physical terms, and yet we know that it has identifiable physical outcomes.  It is a degree of freedom.  A person can have a state within the "class" dimension.  They can possess a certain degree or amplitude of class.  It's hard or impossible to put an exact number on, but it has behavioral effects.  When you're dealing with one person, it is hard to make any predictions based on this degree of freedom. However, you can at least make general observations based on the distribution of people along the class axis.  If there is a nice tall bell curve, you know that there is class equality.  If there is a bimodal distribution, you can imagine there are 2 distinct groups which center around different class statuses.  You won't know anything about why those 2 distinct groups exist, but you will know that they do.

This distribution is something along which work can be done.  If it has physical effects, we can infer that it has physical causes.  If class is defined by access to resources, and there is a sustained asymmetry in access to resources, then that must caused by some physical process.  Since the equilibrium is equal access to resources, in the long run individuals will tend towards that, just like diffusion.   If no work is put into maintaining that class asymmetry, then the work that can be done due to class will be the difference between the initial conditions and the equilibrium.   Any work that is put into maintaining that asymmetrical distribution can result in consistent motion along that dimension.  The path will be through other dimensions.  You don't simply increase your class.  You have to move through space and time and various mental and physical states

Let's take a slightly more quantifiable example: having a car.  Once the concept of "having a car" exists in such a way that it has physical consequences, it is a dimension along which someone can have a state, and events will tend to occur that will create an equal distribution of that state.  If only one car was ever made, it would start changing hands unless work was done to prevent that.  Eventually either nobody would have a car, or everyone would have a car, or everyone would share a car, or everyone would have equal portions of cars.  Given that we have law enforcement, a person cannot just take a possession by force.  But law enforcement uses energy.  The energy of law enforcement translates to work being done along the "having a car" dimension, maintaining the asymmetry of the distribution.

Obviously, this doesn't happen instantaneously. One has to be excited into the state of having a car.  That excitation requires power.  If only 1 person ever owned a car, eventually it would fall apart and they would no longer have a car.  If 1 person had a car, and another person wanted one, if they have free energy, they might do work along other dimensions in an attempt to get one.  The average amount of car per capita would double.  This would make each person twice as likely to end up with a car as before.  As each person gets a car, there is a higher probability of another person being excited into the state of having a car.  However if making cars is made illegal, and work is put in to enforce that law, then this changes the shape of the probability distribution.

So how does does work along one dimension filter into another?  Remember the tire slashing example and the effect that temperature has on tire slashing?  If temperature has a causal effect on the likelihood of tire slashing, then by modifying the temperature, you modify the likelihood of tire slashing.  There is no guarantee that raising the temperature 3 degrees will result in the tires getting slashed, but it increases the likelihood.

Similarly, working an extra job doesn't guarantee you a car.  But it increases the likelihood of getting one.  And you know it.  That's why you would do it.  Once you have the money saved up, you go to a dealership.  It doesn't guarantee that you'll get a car, but it increases the likelihood.  They may all be too expensive, or sold out, or the bus you're taking may get in a wreck on the way there.  But by decreasing your distance from the state of "being at a car dealership," you're increasing your likelihood of getting a car.    Your brain has a way of observing, recording, storing, and retrieving the likelihood of a certain effect from occupying a certain state.  Then, by manipulating the probability distributions of given states of your body in a given sequence, you reach the state of being at a car dealership, which in turn is a manipulation of the probability of getting a car.