---
title: "From abstraction to reality"
summary: "When an institution collects information, it sends a deluge through a filter. It's like panning for gold. It takes out little nuggets that can actuall"
date: "2014-11-04"
---

When an institution collects information, it sends a deluge through a filter.  It's like panning for gold.  It takes out little nuggets that can actually be processed and discards the rest.

When it transmits information or behaves, the process inherently requires a deal of uncertainty.  As it converts the directive "open a new store" into an actual physical reality, the details get fleshed out through actual humans working out the details.  But it's not like the information "build a new store" is transmitted from the head of the company directly to a ground-level subordinate who begins laying blocks.  Small colonies of ants, bees, and our particularly specialized cell systems tend more toward that mode of behavior.  But humans in institutions tend to maintain more flexibility in the form of the response.

Before the decision to open a new store is made, there is a period where options are weighed.  Costs are anticipated.  Locations are scouted, market research is done on potential locations.  Through this process, this hypothetical new "store" gets a bit less abstract.  We can start to predict outcomes based on new details that are ultimately chosen "randomly".

The institution may use policy to define criteria and tolerances in order to reach sufficiency, "it must be below X price, and it needs at least Y square footage."  But the actual buildings are determined exterior to the institution, because exterior reality defines what real estate is available.  This is why I put "randomly" in quotes.  To the institution, it is random because they do not have the tools to analyze it or thus behave in response to it.  The reality of what buildings are available adds an infinite amount of information to the now-less-abstracted "new store."

After finding several buildings which may be suitable for a new shop (many suitable locations will be ignored due to the data the coffee company uses), there could be an institutional process for deciding which ones are chosen for actual visits.  It could be "all of them."  If it is defined in policy, it is an institutional decision.  If it is decided by a human judgement call, then it is external to the institution's intentions.  If it is successful, it is not because of the institution's policy, but because the human involved made good judgement calls.  These judgement calls are not inherently processed by an institution.  The information may be captured later holistically, as in a yearly review, but if there is no policy guiding the behavior it is not an institutional behavior.  A policy may require consulting with a committee.  The committee is an ad-hoc institution with its own properties which are defined by its charter.  When this committee ultimately makes a decision, it passes the information back to the company as a directive, "check out these 5 stores."  The richness of their discussion is immaterial to the company.  It is random from the company's perspective.  Its success is dependent on the construction of the committee.  The committee is a technology or tool that the institution develops.

While visiting the stores, there is reality-based information about each store.  The new store is one level closer to actual execution.  One step further from pure abstraction.

Using that information, the company ideally has a process for abstracting details from those stores into a projection of outcomes for each store.  With an actual location, they can do more focused market research, look at the success rate of other businesses in the area or historically at that location.  All of this information is available to be processed.  But what actually gets processed through the institution is defined by institutional policy.  Thus the institution's attention is limited.  By using humans' attention to detail and judgement calls, the institution loses some level of control over the outcome, but gains a level of reality it would otherwise be unable to achieve without defining policy in painstaking detail.

As the store is actually being built, details such as where to put outlets and shelves start to get weighed and are decided upon through similar selection processes.  Each decision that is made on the spot is a decision that is out of the institution's control, but it saves a vast amount of energy.  Bringing all of those details through the highest levels of decision-making would take a long time.  Similarly, the entity weighing the options can only view them in so much resolution.  At some point, these options will always be boiled down to random variation, human judgement calls, etc.  Once a decision is made, attention moves to a lower level of detail, and less information is sent to the original decision-maker, but more information gets sent further down the pipeline.

Thus attention can be seen not as a singular higher-level process, but as a series of selection processes at individual scales.  If there is not a defined informational path for outlet placement to get to the CEO, then the attention will only be paid on a lower level.  For every decision that is made, there is an interplay between reality and abstraction.  The definition of sufficiency is determined from the top down, At each level, subordinates add more detail to that definition as they become behaviorally closer to the physical manifestation of the behavior.

The physical work required to achieve this is cumulative.  Each brick must overcome gravity.  Each outlet must be molded.  As this hypothetical building is planned, the decisions about what building to pick etc. each require physical work to be made.  The level of detail defined by each higher level requires more work to be done at lower levels to ensure sufficiency.  Each detail that is explicitly defined at a given level takes multiple paths from abstraction to physical reality, back to abstraction, and the physical manifestation of that detail is selected, and each path goes through that same process (forking into hypotheticals, selection, etc.) at successively lower levels.

At some point, when weighing hypotheticals, the path dead-ends. Rather than consider an infinite amount of detail, there is kind of a stored box of assumptions that you apply.  When looking at possible locations for a store, there is and infinite amount of information, but only so much that can be taken into account.  When deciding where to place an outlet, there are an infinite number of places, each with an infinite number of possible advantages or disadvantages, but the likelihood of any of that mattering is slim.

When putting on an outlet, the electrician might ask the foreman which stud they want it on.  Maybe the architect or designer has outlined this, but they will only have outlined it so far.  It is not likely that they will specify the height from the floor, or what stud to put it on, but maybe they have indicated a general area on the wall.  The building code which the foreman is aware of might specify further constraints on the placement.  The foreman might point to a stud and the electrician will stick the receptacle up on the beam and make a judgement call about the height, or will use some standardized measurement.  He might be a couple of inches off when he first sticks it on, so he moves it down a bit.

In his brain, he looked around at all the studs and for a split second imagined the receptacle on all of them and weighed the consequences.  Seeing a few equally good options, and imagining it might matter, he deferred to the foreman, who might have a directive indicating whether it mattered.  Once the foreman picked one, the electrician stops paying attention to all the studs and pays attention to the one.  He also does something interesting by physically putting the receptacle on the stud.  He spends almost no time mentally measuring the beam and determining how far he should hold his arm up with the receptacle in it once he is there.  He just holds it up and watches how it looks, or compares it to a tape measure while it's up there.

At this point the interplay between hypothetical placements and actual placements is almost gone.  The realm of possible actions is extremely well defined.  We know that it's going to be a coffee shop in this particular location with a wall here, the studs happened to land where they did (partially by institutional decision, partially by the framer's placement), so now we put an outlet in this spot.  What was once a few words is now a combination of several sets and subsets of real details about things that exist in the world.

The interplay between abstraction and reality still exists, though.  He hasn't screwed it in.  He decided to move it down a bit.  The interplay at this scale takes very little time and energy because the physical work required is much smaller than for the initial task because the objects involved are smaller.  As he moves the receptacle, his arm muscles are determining how hard to flex based on feedback from his eyes that gets filtered through his brain into an abstract signal determining, not an exact amount of flex, but a sufficient amount of flex (which is why he was off by an inch when he first put it up there).  The premotor cortex perhaps determines this by quickly anticipating the effects of different strengths of flexing and modeling an outcome.  Or perhaps there is some other selection process that is more directly algorithmic, but to his conscious mind, it's all the same.  That is sealed off from his attention.  The signal does go to his hand, however, where before, when he was staring at the studs, it hadn't,  despite the fact that he may have been activating parts of his premotor cortex in envisioning placing the outlet on different studs.

Eventually this interplay basically stops for the electrician.  It stops when his brain can no longer anticipate anything being insufficient about the placement of the receptacle.  He screws it in and is satisfied, then stops paying attention to it and moves to something else.  But the outlet is still part of the system of physical processes that make up an institution.  Eventually, it may need to be replaced or maintained in some way, so its status can still have causal effects in the universe.