---
title: "Infinite Sums & Probability"
summary: "In this video, the infinite sum alternating between 1 and -1 is discussed, as are various solutions. The plausible options for the numerical value res"
date: "2022-01-30"
draft: true
---

In [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PCu_BNNI5x4), the infinite sum alternating between 1 and -1 is discussed, as are various solutions.  The plausible options for the numerical value resulting from that are 0, 1, and 1/2.  Yet none of these answers feel fully justified.  0 doesn't seem right because there's no justification for that answer that doesn't also apply to 1 and visa versa.  1/2 doesn't feel right because there is no division operation, nor a subtraction or addition by 1/2.   Yes, it's an average, but there's no clear justification for averaging them.  That is, unless you're taking the expected value of a probability distribution with .5 probability at 1 and .5 at 0.

Generally in math, probability seems to inhabit a different realm from other numbers.  I'm not aware of any number system that includes probabilities.. if it exists it's not commonly used.  However it doesn't seem impossible to construct a new domain of numbers that includes manipulations to probability distributions, and it seems like it could have valuable applications.

Here's my intuition for why it could make sense.  First, if we take the distribution we just discussed, it seems we can apply at least the 4 common operations to it and come out with an answer that makes perfect sense.  The sum *3, for instance would be 3 -3 +3 - 3... resulting in a probability distribution of {.5 -> 0, .5 -> 3}, with an expected value of 1.5.  Seems perfectly reasonable to me.  How about raising to exponents?  Let's explore that interaction with multiplication by starting with 3 * our original and multiplying that by itself.  For the sum we get 3 -3 +3 -3 ... * 3 - 3 + 3 - 3... = 3*(3 - 3 + 3 - 3...) - 3*(3 - 3 + 3 -3 ..) + 3*(3 - 3 + 3 -3 ...) ... => (9 - 9 + 9 - 9... ) - (9 - 9 + 9 - 9) + (9 -9 +9 - 9)..  => taking the first term from each of those and adding we get 9 - 9 + 9 - 9... and then taking the next term we get -9 + 9 - 9 + 9 ...  So by our logic this would be a probability distribution of {.5 -> 0, .5 -> 9} then {.5 -> -9, .5 -> 0}, then {.5 -> 0, .5 -> 9}, etc..  since this is alternating, we have a distribution of these distributions.  we have a 50% chance of the first distribution and a 50% of the first minus the 2nd, or 0.  So, {.5 -> {.5 -> 0, .5 -> 9}, .5 -> 0}.. this means a new distribution of {.75 -> 0, and .25 -> 9}.  This would give an expected value of 2.25, or 1.5^2

If instead of starting with the sum, we decided to multiply the distribution by itself, we would get something similar. {.5 -> 0, .5 -> 3} * {.5 -> 0, .5 -> 3}, we'd have {.5 * .5 -> 0 * 0, .5 * .5 -> 0 * 3, .5 * .5 -> 3 * 0, .5 * .5 -> 3 * 3 } => {.75 -> 0, .25 -> 9}.

While this isn't rigorous, we can get an idea that the basic operations seem like they could have valid interpretations in this domain.  So we should then be able to define division and exponents as well.  If we know that {.75 -> 0, .25 -> 9} divided by {.5 -> 0, .5 -> 3} = {.5 -> 0, .5 -> 3}, so we need to define a multiplicative identity distribution {1 -> 1} such that it maps all other distributions to themselves.  And then we need to define the inverse of a distribution such that multiplying a distribution by its inverse gives the identity distribution.  This is complicated, but if we imagine that part was solved, then suddenly we could have equations which use infinite series to hop between probability distributions and infinite sums.  This could open a huge range of