---
title: "Information And The Income Gap"
date: "2020-08-22"
draft: false
---

We live in a world ruled by physics and yet there is no connection between the physical laws we know and the "laws" of social science we supposedly live by.  But we should obviously assume that some of those laws apply to human behavior.  We should assume that as a society, we cannot reach an energy density higher than one which would collapse into a black hole, to give an ad absurdum example.

At a glance, money seems like it should be a form of information.  As such, it should be constrained by the physical laws of information.  So it cannot break the [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bekenstein\_bound](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bekenstein_bound) .  But how many bits is a dollar?  If the Fed can print trillions of dollars with the snap of a finger (or a few), what's to stop them from calculating the number of bits per dollar and then "printing" an amount that would break that bound (i.e. changing some balance entries in a database)?  The answer is that the information content of a dollar is not about the number of dollars exactly, but the causal effect that those dollars have on the world.  If the exchange of a dollar from one hand to another results in a steel beam being lifted off the ground, how can we describe the effect of the transaction with physics?

There are steps between the dollar exchange and the beam lifting.   Another similar example would be a switch powering some machinery or a light switch.  The steps between the cause and the effect each introduce some error.  If a cable is loose and a connection is broken between the switch and the lamp, or if the power is off, then the light will not come on.  So in fact the light only comes on with some certain probability.  It also does not come on forever.  The power might go out.  The bulb could burn out.  The bulb can flicker on and off.  So this seemingly discrete event of turning a light on can now be thought of in continuous terms.

Increasing the probability of the light coming on when the switch is moved to the "on" position is essentially reducing the noise of the communication channel, and it takes work.  Examples of that work being done upon the communication channel are: the work being done at the power plant, the work that was done to engineer a lightbulb, or the work that went into creating the wire.  All of that work increases the probability that the light will come one when the switch is flipped.  It is essentially decreasing the noisiness of the channel. 

The basic point of all this is that money can be used to increase signal fidelity, or reduce randomness in a very real, physical way.  This is true for light switches, it is also true for cars.  Money can be used to make cars run more reliably.  It can also be used for healthcare.  What your money buys is more than the physical object or the service.  It is buying you reliability... A higher the probability you can achieve a goal given a certain amount of effort... A higher signal-noise ratio.

One logical conclusion of this is that the rich are living in a world that is much less random than the poor.  When they intend for a room to light up, there is a higher probability it will happen with relatively lower effort than a poor person who might live in an apartment with bad wiring and has to work more hours to pay for the electric bill.  The noise of unexpected expenses tends to hit the poor much harder, as the noise is a higher proportion of their overall wealth.  They do not have as big of a buffer.

For small differences in probability, this may not be a big deal, but at some point, the correlation between one's efforts and success is completely overtaken by the noise.   The signal is lost.  Economically rational actors make different decisions when there is more randomness.  Future discounting goes way up, because who knows what will happen in the meantime?  If you have $1000 in the bank for the first time in 2 years because the random fluctuation of expenses has given you a few good months, then maybe you'll spend it on something that will give you a little dopamine (a nice shirt, a new TV, drugs, etc.) and make your life feel worth living instead of putting it in a CD like some lizard person tells you is the "correct" answer.  The $0.30 interest from the CD will  not register in the noise.

According to expectancy theory, motivation to do a task is a function of (value of a reward) \* (perceived probability of achieving that reward via that task). If the probability of achieving that reward by doing that task is insignificant, then motivation will be low / non-existent. With investing in a CD for a broke person, the value of the reward is low.  The probability of successfully making money from it is also relatively low. They will likely need to sell it in the next few months to cover some bill. Meanwhile drugs are a low-value, immediate-term reward, but the probability of achieving that reward is high.

Another logical conclusion of this idea is that poor people would tend to have an external locus of control, whereas rich people would have an internal one, because according to this theory, it is literally true.  The rich have more influence over their environments.  That said, there are environments where noise is lower than others, so you can be relatively poor in a low-noise environment and so someone would be more likely to end up with an internal locus of control.