---
title: "Interplay between Human and Automaton Modes in Institutions"
summary: "If we want to design institutions which can predictably avoid disastrous outcomes for their members and humanity in general, we have to understand wha"
date: "2024-01-08"
draft: true
---

If we want to design institutions which can predictably avoid disastrous outcomes for their members and humanity in general, we have to understand what exactly they are.  Consistently when describing the behavior of a corporation or government, people will say "it's just people."  If that were true, their behavior would closely align with the intents and desires of the average person.  Yet polling shows that individual people, for instance care about stopping global warming way more than our institutions reflect.  Some people cope with this truth by insisting that actually most people must not care very much.  Deep down they want to destroy the environment.  Others cope by suggesting that it must not really be a problem.  But the majority want to do something about it and yet the institutions that supposedly represent the majority do nothing. That would not be the case if these institutions were "just people."  What they actually are are people whose behavior has been constrained through incentives to serve the purposes of the institution.  The probability distributions of their behavior have been transformed.

Let's look at how an institution collects information about its environment and uses that to "actuate," or trigger some work to be done on the environment, including work to maintain its information channels.  The most minimal example that comes to mind is a vending machine business.  In this case most of the enterprise is in automaton mode only.  Let's say it's one of those older machines with 6 soft drinks or so.  The customer puts in money then inputs information about what drink they want.  A drink is dispensed.  Someone did work to prepare this information channel.  They designed and fabricated the machine.  Someone installed it and filled it with drinks.  The information about which drinks were selected comes to the vending machine owner, who then refills it.  Perhaps they have to put a purchase order in.  They get information about (1) how many people bought drinks since their last visit (2) which ones they chose.  If they have multiple vending machines, they can also combine this with existing information about where the vending machine is located and compare performance.  The outputs that the vending machine business has are (1) adding more vending machines (2) changing the locations of its vending machines (3) changing the stock quantity or type (4) modifying the behavior of the machines (5) changing the appearance of the vending machines.

One example of information not being in the umwelt of such a business might be if the mechanism is broken for one drink.  This information may not enter into the institution if the mechanisms aren't tested.  Someone might think that people just don't like that drink.

 

Finding the simplest institution is a bit counter-intuitive because the smallest institutions can end up being more complicated from an information perspective because they involve so much intuitive decision-making by the members.  Rather than acting in automaton mode, the members are more often acting in human mode.

An example of this is a mom and pop shop, in which the transactions with the outside world are relatively straightforward, but the decision-making process is almost all based on human-type information processing.  Obviously it is based on information, but most of that information is not explicitly captured by the institution except to the extent that the owner documents a system for making such decisions and put it into a manual which is accepted as collective property of the members of the business.  Each company is required to have articles of organization to register which means there is *some* institutional decision-making process.   However it mostly consists of delegating all decision-making responsibility to the owners.  We can still see the constraint of probability in decision-making that the institution places on the owner.  If customers are buying more beans and running out, they are inherently presenting information to the owner that beans are in demand.  The owner will make the decision to buy more.  The probability of buying more beans and giving them more shelf space is increased, regardless of whether it's the owner making the decision or someone who is helping him for a few weeks while he's out of town.  Shelf space and stock are part of the explicit outputs that the store puts into the environment.  They are also inputs.

It's similar with the simplest form of government: absolute monarchy.  There are systems, but those systems delegate their decision-making power to the king.  That said, the king *is* beholden to the system on some level.  Assassination was a mechanism by which the inertia of the system showed itself... i.e. through which the institutional decision-making structure reveals itself.  A king who is too radical and threatens to upsets the existing structure too much would inevitably make enemies, and those enemies would conspire against him.  This constrains the probability