---
title: "Language and degrees of freedom"
summary: "If you believe the world can be divided into \"good\" and \"evil,\" and take that as your primary starting point for how to break down the world, this wil"
date: "2018-02-09"
---

If you believe the world can be divided into "good" and "evil," and take that as your primary starting point for how to break down the world, this will flavor your logical arguments for how you break down the world.  If, instead, you break the world into the categories "interesting" and "boring," this will also change the way you break down the world.

The two may converge in any number of cases.  Both can provide logical arguments for why you shouldn't kill someone.  The "good" and "evil" person might say, "People should maximize the good in life.  Life is good. Therefore extinguishing life is wrong."  Someone who believes in maximizing the "interesting" might say "People are have diverse ideas.  Any time you extinguish a life, you increase the predictability of the universe.  Therefore, extinguishing life is wrong."  Since they can both come to the conclusion that killing people is wrong, they could have a very fluid conversation with very little friction about clear-cut murder stories.

Most likely, nobody goes through life with only one of these frames of reference, but when making a decision, you ultimately weigh many of these, and make your decision based on some sort of weighted integration of them.  You may think that something is a little bad, but if it is very interesting, very likely to feel good, etc., it is possible that these will outweigh the good/bad in the decision.  Similarly,  someone who seeks stimulation might be pretty curious about something, but ultimately not do it because it is inefficient, uncomfortable, impractical, or any other number of reasons.  The distance between the fundamental assumption and the rationally-reached conclusion will affect the weighting.

However, sometimes this is due to a gut feeling.  A gut feeling is what happens when your main axis of analysis is being overridden.  If you primarily break the world down between violent and nonviolent, you develop an entire mental rational vocabulary founded in those categories.  When you're deciding what to order on a menu, it will often explicitly enter your mind as a factor.  If you're craving something fatty, but you're against violence, you will have to come up with some way of rationalizing your choice of pepperoni pizza.  You will have to reach for some greater violence that could come about if nobody ate pepperoni in order to justify the violence inherent in the pepperoni.  This requires you to consciously flesh out the details of the category "violent" and "nonviolent."  Someone who seeks stimulation might feel compelled to pick a new menu item every time.  If they go against that, they will have to consciously flesh out in their mind why it is OK not to seek novelty in this case.

The weights that we put on these different frames of reference are our values.  They change over time, and their configuration defines our character.  They are programmed into us through our stories and experiences.  There are competing pressures that are constantly trying to change the weights.

Now imagine a person who sees the world as violent and non-violent is talking to a person who sees the world as interesting or boring, and they're trying to come to a conclusion about how best to feed the growing population of their village.  Of course they will come to different conclusions.   Not only that, but they will barely be able to talk about it.  The arguments that the interest-seeker uses will seem invalid to the peace-seeker.  She might be saying "We should go explore and find more land" and the peace-seeker will say "every time we've done that, it's led to war, wtf?"  But their arguments will not change each other's opinions.

The peace-seeker is avoiding violence because of negative experiences and stories associated with it.  The interest-seeker is searching for novelty because of negative experiences with being bored or boring people.  The only way for them to come to a decision is to have a process in place that will make the decision between them... that will weight each of their already-weighted decisions based on their perspectives and churn out an over-arching decision.  Without such a process, they will not be a community, they will just be alone.

For such a process to be stable, however, it must predictably give returns on the investment it requires of the disagree-er.  So if the pacifist is roped into a scouting expedition on another band's territory, they must have the expectation that in the future, the work that they have contributed to the community will give them some benefit.  That later on, they will have a greater input in the decision-making because of their willingness to go along with it.  If the majority of people involved in the process do not have this expectation, they will stop participating in it.

This is the kind of process that a basic code of laws, such as those included in western religions provides.  Essential to the religion is not only the philosophy, but also the institutions that are created around the religion.  The process of setting up a temple is essentially franchising a method of social transaction.  As these social transactions become more ritualized and codified into stories, and stories built upon those stories, they can be passed to the village over and used as a basis for developing a social vocabulary that allows investment between two villages.

As the process is spread wider and wider, the process must work more efficiently.  By using the stories to actually change people's values, the religion can align two villages even closer than if the stories were merely to communicate methods of decision-making.  Then, if the stories can serve to promote a primary value of the promoting the process itself, of course, it can compel people to spread the process even wider.

However, similar to the propagation of error in a function, as the process spreads wider, it can branch into mutually-unintelligible social languages. In order to combat this, the process must be spread with precision.  In a system where information must flow by foot, the geographical spread will inevitably reduce the intelligibility of the social vocabulary from one side to the other,