---
title: "Language and Organization IV"
summary: "So language can help us organize into roles. That seems pretty obvious, but what is the exact process. You have a group of humans running around the d"
date: "2014-12-18"
draft: true
---

So language can help us organize into roles.  That seems pretty obvious, but what is the exact process.  You have a group of humans running around the desert chasing down antelope with a bit of extra time on their hands, but how does that translate into office buildings and spreadsheets?  There seems to be something else at play.  If, as I hypothesize, institutions are essentially sentient, or at least alive, how does that stem from one human developing a functional view of another?

An essential part has to do with the rate of information transfer.  As roles become more specialized, and the environments in which the various roles take place, the rate at which new information is developed in the whole population outstrips the ability for that information to be transferred to others.  At this point the population will either split or differentiate.  If one person becomes extremely good at a role, but cannot pass that information, it doesn't do much for the long-term prospects of the population.  The ability to imitate behavior makes great strides in the transfer rate, but it can only go so far.  Imitation takes time, too, and given enough roles and tasks to fill, it is simply impossible for everyone in a group to learn all of them.

Some roles are toward goals which can be achieved, completed, and forgotten about, like building a foundation.  But some roles are toward processes.  Processes, like maintaining a fire, are made up of individual tasks that have finite beginnings and ends, but the overarching goal is never achieved.  They can get easier and easier, but they are never finished.  The leap from task to process is not as obvious as is may seem at first glance.  The sub-tasks of {maintain fire} are simple enough, and take little enough time that anyone could do them.  Also, it is not necessarily something that needs to be a communal good.  Each proto-human having their own fire is doable and has its benefits, so such a task would not necessarily provide enough impetus to collaborate.  {Get food} also does not readily translate into a process.  It is something that can be done by different people each time, and it can be treated as a one-off task each time.  There is no real obvious benefit to integrating the sub-tasks into a whole.  It is not in the interest of an individual human to become dependent on others.  It is restricting.  People like to be able to do things themselves.  This is a pressure that needs to be overcome by a common good that is more important than these tasks that anyone can do.

If you look at soccer, the positions aren't all that differentiated.  A defender will rarely go in for a shot, but the basic tactics they use are similar to offenders.  However, the keeper is completely distinct.  It is one particular job that is very specialized because it only makes sense for one person to do it, and it's too important to risk some person with a weakness in goal-keeping take over.  A forward can fall back and defend and it won't be that different from a defender doing the same thing.  But with a keeper, someone needs to be there at all times, and they need to be consistently good at it.  I suspect whatever the first fully differentiated role will have some similar properties.  Particularly that is is a constant task.  Perhaps it was different for different peoples.  Meerkats apparently delegate sentry duty, so that could be the thing.  Guarding a camp is important.  It is particularly important if you're growing food.

Regardless, some major process-type goal must have been key to the differentiation.  The "hunter-gatherer" thing is pretty tenuous in my opinion, because there's nothing that precludes women from hunting.  Other animals have males look after children.  Chimpanzees don't have differentiated roles that resemble that at all.  Furthermore, the justification for hunter-gatherer societies is that humans have lower population density but more cooperation is required.  First of all, this doesn't look at how the cooperation takes place, but secondly, if this is true, why did the advent of cities not immediately result in less differentiated gender roles?  In fact, it resulted in the opposite.

Gender is a particularly clean-cut line along which to differentiate action.  Obvious biological differences exist.  Yet there still needs to be an actual mechanism identified for this role differentiation.  And until that mechanism is addressed, the presumption that gender roles were the first examples of role differentiation among humans will only serve to prevent attention being paid to other possible mechanisms.  Humans didn't just wake up one day and decide to cooperate extensively.  People advocating for hunter-gatherer societies look at the potential benefits of cooperation and just presume it made sense for it to happen without looking at the downsides that were preventing it from happening previously.

At some point, humans had to go from individuals assigning task roles to other individuals, to assigning process roles.

They would then need to be able to replace the person in that process role.  If it were a critical function, then it would be required that another person be able to learn those roles.  Passing on the information about how to perform these roles would be essential, and would be most easily done through practice and imitation.  Perhaps teacher/helper was the first role differentiation.  Regardless, at some point you would have a group of people assigned a process role.  This is where the inclusive first person plural would have to come in.  Before, it would make no sense to refer to a collective group performing and action.   Once a process role can be assigned to a group, differentiation can occur much more quickly.  And in another crucial step, groups must be able to assign tasks.   The group that is assigned the process role of assigning process roles is a government.  From there tasks can be efficiently digested by an ever-changing, ever expanding dynamic hierarchy.

Each of these steps requires the ability for a group to act as a unit with a singular agency.