---
title: "Language and Organization III"
summary: "So far I've talked about language co-developing with concepts and language modulating attention and behavior. But how does this relate to human social"
date: "2014-12-17"
draft: true
---

So far I've talked about language co-developing with concepts and language modulating attention and behavior.  But how does this relate to human social organization?

It comes from the fact that groups of humans are characterized by words.  When I was describing a child moving a car around learning that it is an object in its power to manipulate, I left out an important kind of toy.. the doll.  Some humans are taught that there are other humans under their control.  Through the entire structure of society, there is an idea that one person can be in charge of another person.

Humans delegate tasks.  Because of this, our language is designed to break tasks down.  Through delegating tasks, we get more done than could ever be accomplished without it.  But with it comes the use of other humans as means to an end goal.   Do animals ever say "Hey, if you go get me a piece of fruit, I'll get you back later?"  They do have some sense of empathy and duty to share, but no mammals do anything resembling delegating tasks the way we do in any context that I've heard.

Ants, for instance, often delegate tasks amongst each other, and I wouldn't be surprised if it feels in some way to them that they are doing favors for each other (if they have anything like what we would call sensation or feeling), but this delegation seems to be mostly directed by genetics.  Then you have something like the differentiated roles that dolphins or wolves play in hunting.  And they may share rewards in some hierarchical fashion, but they are not particularly specialized in their behavior.

By naming parts of tasks and assigning them to different individuals, you can create new specializations and organizational structures on the fly.  These parts of tasks that someone can be assigned to are roles.  Roles have a hierarchical similarity to behavior in general.  On the one hand, a more permanent role can cause someone to develop a deeper expertise, on the other hand they sacrifice flexibility.  There are over-arching roles as well as sub-roles.  A center and a forward have certain roles, but they also create new roles on the fly as the situation requires.  When one person is trying to drive in, another might set a pick.  With  a larger team like in football, the roles tend to become more static and specialized.

Each role then can have defined tasks associated with it, and the person performing the role will be expected to pay attention to the functional aspects of their role.  Some goals, once accomplished, require little or no more attention.  Once a foundation is poured, nobody should have to worry about it for years.  The completion of a task that lasts longer than a human's life-span then allows them to build off of that foundation.  A dolphin would have a hard time constructing anything that would last very long as entropy just takes place more quickly down there.  There are more creatures that come around and tear things up, currents erode things quickly, and things dissolve.  In, say, a desert, you mostly just have to worry about wind erosion.

So how does language have the power to delegate tasks, but a dog's barking doesn't?  I think it boils down to the sheer number of animals that can survive in one place.  Since dogs have anatomy so specialized for hunting, they don't have the flexibility of diet that primates do.  So, fewer of them can survive in any one spot.  Other primates have the numbers, but not so much the impetus.  They tend to live places where food is plentiful enough, they don't have many predators.  They also don't do much hunting.  They do show signs of tool-use and cultural aspects to their troops.  But the primates that started hunting animals outside the forest, pushed out by competing primates, and lions and tigers and bears, figured out how to specialize to track animals down and kill them.

Of course this is all post-hoc reasoning, but the fact is that it was essentially arbitrary in some ways.  But it was also inevitable in some ways.  Biology tends toward the maximum entropy.  This was hypothesized by A-life years ago, and has been confirmed in recent biological studies.  By organizing into groups that can develop new forms of behavior more quickly, nature is creating the opportunity for more degrees of freedom to be expressed.  New ideas are new potential goals, new potential goals are new potential behaviors, new potential behaviors become new expressed behaviors, which is a set of atoms taking trajectories that no atoms have taken before.  And maybe those new trajectories will help dissipate all that pent-up energy from the center of the earth, and the sun's rays shining down getting trapped by the atmosphere, and the atoms all being squished together by gravity.