---
title: "Life cycle of an institution"
summary: "So if an institution is a set of people mutually constraining each other's behavior, then an institution \"dies\" when those behaviors are no longer car"
date: "2014-06-09"
---

So if an institution is a set of people mutually constraining each other's behavior, then an institution "dies" when those behaviors are no longer carried out.  This can be caused by many things.  As I briefly mentioned before, I believe that these institutions are maintained by a code.  Failure to transmit the code effectively enough will result in dissolution.  Institutions can slowly lose in competition with other institutions if they behave on the same scale.  Major catastrophe can occur.  And, the behaviors of the institution can cease to serve the interest of its members.  People are motivated when they have a chance of getting something they want.  If contributing work or attention to an institution does not result in an increase in reward, members will stop contributing.  If the reward is not something that its members want, they will stop contributing.

Every institution is centered around a set of fundamental ideas.  The code of the institution allows for the modulation of "internal control parameters" on the subjects of its control.  As an example, take the institutional review board involved in human subjects experimentation.  The federal code of regulations provides a set of instructions for recreating a certain kind of institution that serves a certain function within another institution.

Every institution also has a semi-permeable boundary.  It is necessary for a successful institution to have a process of recruiting new members and expelling those who do not contribute.  The recruitment ritual tends to act as a filter.  Initiation into an institution usually requires an individual to perform a set of behaviors that reflect a threshold ability required for future performance.  A gang initiates with violence.  A corporate job initiates with a mind-numbing application process.  A graduate program initiates with an application process not unlike a grant proposal.  US citizenship requires passing through as many hoops and bureaucratic systems as our society requires to be successful.  A religion requires statements of faith and going through rituals.  Societies with adulthood initiation rituals usually choose those which reflect the values of the culture.  Militaries have boot camps.  Some of these initiation tasks are explicitly designed as filters, some are implicit (but inevitable as the internal characteristics of the institution will leak into its interactions with non-members), but they all serve the same basic purpose: establishing that a certain member can sufficiently contribute what the institution requires.  If less is required in an initiation ritual, more members can come in, but the overall integrity of the institution is lower.

The most basic part of any code is the phatic expression as defined by [Jakobson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_Jakobson#The_communication_functions).  A phatic expression serves the function of establishing whether it is worthwhile to try to communicate.  The initiation ritual of an institution is essentially a phatic behavior.  It serves the function of determining whether it is worthwhile to incorporate a person.

Once someone (or a smaller-scale institution) is a member of another institution, that institution must make a net contribution to the survival of the individual, and it must constrain the behavior of the individual in such a way that the individual makes a net contribution to the institution.  The overall behavior of the institution must be appropriate for gaining resources for its member in a given context.  The set of ideas implicit in the code are what create an institution, and they are what causes its death.

No idea applies in all situations.  An institutional behavioral framework is not one, but many ideas.  When one of those is no longer effective, there must be a process for modifying those ideas and the behaviors associated with them.  A less developed code allows for more adaption, but less efficient behavior.

Many native american languages are what is called [polysynthetic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polysynthetic_language).  These languages would have a high investment for basic communication, but then they would be very effective for communicating complex ideas quickly.  In a small isolated population this makes sense.  The code can be standardized effectively.  But when you have to teach this kind of language as a second language, or you have to maintain standardization across a large, disparate population, suddenly the initial investment required is not expedient.  A language like English or Chinese is called analytic.  In these languages, you can reach a basic level of communication easily, but the finer points vary among different speakers.  As languages collide, they tend to become more analytic.  The result is that the language does not have the intimate relationship to the context and community of a population that others do until that standardization is built back up through communicating with a small population (hence dialects).

A code that is flexible allows transactions among greater numbers of people.  Basic behaviors will have a lower initial activation energy, but more complex behaviors will require improvisation dependent on the context, which could result in transactions that are not beneficial to the institution.  A tighter (i.e. with more tokens and better enforced) code won't be flexible, but for transactions and behaviors with code established, there will be a higher likelihood of success and benefit.

Institutions are often born by splitting from an existing institution.  In this way, they inherit much of the code (some implicitly some explicitly) of their parent institution.  They strip down the code until it is at a level where it is flexible and transferrable enough to allow new members.  As new members come in if the code is effective, the institution gains resources proportional to the work done on its behalf and it can use those resources to research and add code.  This code is composed of contextual information (beliefs that are to be acted upon), biopower technologies (methods of enforcing code and promoting work on the institutions behalf), behavioral frameworks (methods of completing work effectively and efficiently), and maybe some other things.

A small institution needs to invest little in code enforcement and standardization.  A new institution also must have compelling motivational technologies or it wouldn't have been born in the first place.  As it grows, it must invest more in biopower technologies and code standardization--not only because it has new members, but because the code is growing.  It acquires members who are less invested in its central ideas and are more interested in acquiring its resources.  As the institution grows, there is a point at which the gains from new efficiencies in the code and work from new members is outweighed by the regulatory investments required.  In the meantime, its context continues to change, and old parts of the code start to become irrelevant.  However it is much easier to add to code than to remove it.  Just like DNA, as soon as something new is added, other things are added that are dependent on it.  Even if there were a system in place to remove it, the investment required to restructure the dependencies is usually going to be higher than the foreseeable gains.

New members find the irrelevant parts of the code worthless and thus have less respect for the institution.  They see less incentive to do work on behalf of the institution, because they have to learn more of the code, and their prospects of reward are lower than when the institution was young.  Those invested in the code start to defend it adamantly.  They have invested in this institution at the expense of investing in other institutions, and it has provided them with a reduction of volatility as a reward.  A threat to the institution is an increase in potential volatility to them.  They begin to promote enforcement of the code for its own sake.  This is where the brittleness comes in.  It is ideological brittleness.  This is a turning point from an institution using primarily positive feedback to one using primarily negative feedback.  Most members don't see the prospect of reward, but they are hesitant to make the investment required to join another institution, and there are still resources the institution has to distribute.  When an institution starts costing its members more than it rewards them, they will drop out.  When this happens to those maintaining the code, the institution is dead.