---
title: "Newtonian Physics as Information I"
summary: "Information theory is quickly gaining traction in physics for its explanatory power for many different aspects of physics. In particular, to my knowle"
date: "2018-02-09"
draft: true
---

Information theory is quickly gaining traction in physics for its explanatory power for many different aspects of physics.  In particular, to my knowledge, in  [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dEaecUuEqfc), Ron Garrett discusses the explanatory power that it has for entanglement, and [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-OlEGq_g2FI&t=433s), Erik Verlinde uses it to define gravity as an emergent phenomenon.

Information theory provides a lot of tools and theorems based on the Fourier transform.  The Heisenberg uncertainty principle is a consequence of the fact that [a function in momentum space is the Fourier transform of the function in position space,](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Position_and_momentum_space) which is an idea that applies to classical as well at quantum physics.  Information theory has been laying a lot of theoretical groundwork exploring the dynamics of discrete and continuous behavior of the Fourier transform, which is essential to determining mechanics of a system exhibiting both discrete(particle) and continuous(wave) nature.

However in order for information theory to be accepted as essentially a unifying foundation for other aspects of physics, it must be able to explain not just a few instances of quantum weirdness, or fill in some theoretical gaps like dark matter, but it must be able to explain the physics we experience on a daily  basis as well.

Ultimately Newton's laws will have to be rederived using information theory and then taking whatever assumptions apply to the human scale, just like relativity resolves to newtonian laws when v  The (reduced) [Gibbs entropy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gibbs_entropy) σ can then be seen as simply the amount of Shannon information needed to define the detailed microscopic state of the system, given its macroscopic description.

If the Gibbs entropy represents the amount of information needed to define the microscopic state of a system, then it stands to reason it must also represent the maximal amount of information theoretically able to be contained by that system.  Imagine a system of 4 switches, which can have 2^4 states.   In order to define the system, you need 4 bits.  Also, that physical system can store exactly 4 bits.

This information about these switches is not accessible, however, except through a communication over a channel.  In the case of physical matter, this information is transmitted through forces.  Specifically electromagnetic forces.  So the properties of the channel should align with the forces we see.

If 2 bodies are uncorrelated, we could say they share very little mutual information, so they are not exerting large forces on each other because they cannot.  Large amounts of information cannot be transmitted, because they do not have enough mutual information to encode decode transmissions with large amounts of information.  If they are closely correlated, we can then project an estimate of how much mutual information they contain at each $$\Delta t$$.  Sticking with a switch for a bit for simplicity's sake, let's imagine there is a switch controlling a light on one side of a room and on the other is a guy controlling a switch on his desk.  He is looking at the light across the room and flipping his switch whenever he sees the light turn.  Let's say the light switches every 3 seconds.  But let's say he takes a second to react.  That means for every 3 seconds their states are correlated for 2 seconds.  During those 2 seconds, their mutual information is 1 bit, which is 100% of their capacity.  During the 1 second delay, they are uncorrelated and their mutual information is 0.  This means that their average mutual information per second is 2/3 bits per second.  If 3 seconds is the fastest that the light can switch, and 1 second is the fastest our guy can react, that means 2/3 bits/second is the channel capacity.

Over time, however our guy might find the rhythm.  He might be able to sync up and correlate his own switching with that of the light across the room.  If he is correct about the rhythm, then he can manage to precisely sync up with the light.  If we presume for now that he can do this with arbitrary accuracy, then the result will be a mutual information of nearly 1 bit/second.  Our channel capacity is still 2/3 bits/second, but the mutual information is now larger because of the information our guy is storing.  His anticipation of the next signal requires information storage on his end that ultimately must be some physical process as well. This physical process will require some oscillator at a given frequency, phase, and amplitude, and the energy from that oscillator must eventually be amplified enough to flip the switch on his end.

Modifying the phase and frequency of our guy's oscillator takes work, and it will take an iterative process to calibrate the signal.  That iterative process will take work at each step.  The result of each step will ideally be an oscillator closer to the desired calibration.  To get a 100% exact calibration would take and infinite amount of work.  So his mutual information is 1 - some error or alternatively, 1 * some certainty.

If the light bulb burns out, but our guy doesn't change his oscillator.  He is still in sync with the source of the oscillation of the lightbulb, meaning he holds information about that source.  He has a mutual information of 1 bit per second with that source, but the channel capacity is now 0.

Now imagine 2 bodies out in space, emitting black body radiation.  Of course there is not a man inside each flipping switches on and off.  But each photon that leaves body A and hits body B drives energy activity in B at a frequency related to some oscillation happening within body A.  Over long periods of time, or over very large numbers of oscillators/particles--higher mass in other words, this can result in mutual information between the 2 bodies.  Dissipative systems result in strange semi-organized behavior, perhaps because they are somehow setting up the rudiments of some sorts of more complex oscillators that are storing information which correlates to the originating signal/source of radiation.

Mutual information between these two bodies is increasing at a certain rate depending on the amount of radiation one receives from another.  The way I would like to look at it is that the distance between the 2 bodies is decreasing.  So as mutual information increases, distance decreases.  This could explain "spooky action at a distance" because these highly correlated particles or masses are actually closer together.  If you're already sold on the idea of information-based physics, I will start my attempt to build a quantitatively verifiable model of this in post II.  If you are unconvinced that information could apply to fundamental physical forces, I will explain these ideas more in[ post III](http://spacechimplifecom.local/2018/02/11/newtonian-physics-as-information-iii/), where I move away from the stripped-down models that are meant to be readily translated into math, and take a more philosophical approach.