---
title: "Physics and Information"
summary: "This post is dedicated to proposing an explaining how an information-theoretical model could tie into the physicality of accepted physics. Information"
date: "2018-02-11"
draft: true
---

This post is dedicated to proposing an explaining how an information-theoretical model could tie into the physicality of accepted physics.  Information seems like such an ethereal thing.  Words and opinions are information and they are so subjective.  How could a word be responsible for something physical?  Most of the existing examples of information in physics deal with things that are hard to put in human terms.  For instance we know things about the the theoretical limits of information of a black hole, but it's hard to imagine what that could possibly mean.

We know that all matter exhibits wave-particle duality.  Any particle's motion can be described using a [wave function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave_function).  This is essentially a probability density function that can either be described in terms of the particle's momentum or position.  It doesn't matter.  They're essentially describing the same thing... the movement of the particle.

We also know that every body with a temperature is emitting black body radiation.  This can be viewed as the result of collisions between particles within the body.  Each photon which is emitted as a result of this sort of collision will then carry some information about the motion of the particles which caused its emission.

It doesn't do much good for a mental intuition of the idea to think of that information as being stored as bits like they would be on a hard drive.  Instead it's easier to think of the wave nature of the particles.  As a large body moves through space, the particles which compose it do not occupy the exact same coordinates, just ones which are close.  They vary from the mean constantly.  The motion of larger mass could be viewed as a sinusoidal function with a very large amplitude and period, whereas the motion of the tiny particles making it up could be viewed as an added sine wave with a much smaller amplitude and period.  So the wave function of each tiny particle within the body also has a superposition of the wave function of the body it is contained in.

If many photons are being ejected from that body, then when they reach another body, their average should again show some effect of the wave function of the larger body.  In order for these photons to have any effect on the body, they must interact with the particles of that body in some way.  They either must be absorbed, absorbed and re-emitted, collide, or whatever.  No matter what, whatever particles they interact with will be influenced by the wave function of those photons.  The photons will have transferred some of the signal from the wave function of the original body to the new body in the process of that interaction.  This will cause some degree of correlation of movement between the particle in the new body that absorbs the photon, and the particle in the original body which emits it.

Meanwhile, the same is happening with photons that are emitted from the new body.  What is slowly happening is the particles which make up the 2 bodies are becoming entangled, or sharing signals, or increasing mutual information.

It's hard to see how jostling some photons would cause any behavior other than pushing the bodies away from each other, though.  And each individual particle is going to "forget" the information about the source signal as soon as it collides with something else.  For this we should think of [dissipative systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dissipative_system).  A dissipative system is essentially one in which energy is being added to the system faster than it can be removed.  In these sorts of systems, patterns start emerging.  These patterns are correlations between particles, for instance vortices, like a whirlpool or a hurricane.  Another example is [convection cells.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rayleigh–Bénard_convection)

As photons are ejected from one body, they can not only affect individual particles in another body, but can churn up organized behavior.  These organized patterns of behavior are a form of memory, and the dynamics increase in magnitude as particles continue to bring information from their source.  Meanwhile, a similar system could be developing in the first body.  If there is some periodic churning going on in each body due to the signal coming from the other, then it is possible that that churning could be precisely aligned along some average phase and frequency of the photons coming from the source in a way that dampens oscillations away, and amplifies oscillations toward the source.  Regardless, the existence of those forms of dissipative organization would form a sort of distributed representation of the source signal.

That is one interpretation of the model I am proposing.  Another interpretation is to ignore the intuitive definition of distance and say that the mutual information is actually the distance.  And that the mass is the "number of switches."  This should work because we are essentially calling particles switches.  They store the transmitted information in their trajectories.  Uncorrelated particles could be moving any which way independently of the photons coming from the source.

A large body would have a large number of switches, and many of those switches would be correlated with other switches on the board.  In terms of particles, when a particle starts exhibiting behavior correlated with an outside source, it will likely soon be knocked off course by an internal particle.  In this way it will take a lot of driving from the original source to eventually create a significant pattern in the body.  This is why a body with more "switches" would have more resistance to an increase of mutual information, or a decrease in distance according to that interpretation.

These correlations in a body from an outside source are essentially a "representation" of that source of information.  As a representation becomes more an more resolved, it should contain more information about the original source.  This will mean that the 2 bodies are closer together, which will mean they are more able to transmit information, which will in turn increase the transmission of information.

Now we're talking about panels of switches and particles, but we could instead think of each body as containing continuous degrees of freedom.  These switches become continuous degrees of freedom in a similar way to how a binomial distribution with infinite trials becomes a gaussian distribution.  The patterns of organization that arise among several particles which I referred to as a sort of representation of the source signal can be viewed as a single degree of freedom where the potential energy that is stored in that pattern of physical behavior is a portion of the internal energy of the object. Each bit of information that arrives is like a trial in a binomial distribution that either contributes to that pattern or detracts from it.

These oscillators contain a certain amount of energy and interfering photons can either interfere constructively or destructively with the pattern of motion of the oscillator.  You can think of a body as having an oscillator representing each body around it, with an energy proportional to its distance.

That oscillator is essentially a like receiving antenna.  It receives signals with a fidelity that is affected by noise levels and the power of the signal.  The degree of entanglement is proportional in some way to the channel capacity. As the signal continues to be received, the mutual information grows/the oscillator increases in energy/the signal gets amplified, which in turn increases the channel capacity, decreasing the distance between the two bodies.  We can say that the body is entangled with everything in its observable universe to some extent, and that those entanglements are each represented by a channel capacity between the source and the representation within the body.  The energy that is stored in the representation is then proportional to the work that source can cause to be done within the body.

Signals from distant sources can thus do work on a body by doing work on these oscillators.  These oscillators can be correlated with each other in such a way that they exhibit chains of causal effects with an amount of work and precision proportional to the energy stored in these oscillators as well as the channel capacity between each oscillator.