---
title: "No The Universe Is Probably Not A"
date: "2025-03-29"
draft: false
---

There’s been a bit of buzz lately about Wolfram’s theories about reality. Most of it as far a I can tell has been less about the substance of how observations match his data, but more about his interpretation of his own model. Or perhaps it’s more appropriate to call it a “motivation”.

I actually do like the model itself. It meshes well with some ideas I’ve explored myself while looking into graph rewriting systems. I do believe some hypergraph-based system could ultimately unite all the disparate fields. However, I don’t think it will provide evidence that “the universe is computational”.

First off, let’s determine what that means. When people say the universe is computational, they tend to mean that on some fundamental level that the universe is doing the same thing as a computer. The strong version of this would be that at some fundamental level, we see evidence of “computations”. The weaker version would be that the universe \*can\* be modeled via computations.

There’s a trivial sense in which the weaker version can be said to be true. Math consists of rewrite rules. So anything we can model with math (including everything we consider to be valid modern physics) would also inherently fall into this definition. We obviously can model the universe to some degree of accuracy with math. The question of whether we can fully model the universe with it is equivalent to the question of determinism. While people tend to use the phrase to argue the strong version, they sometimes retreat to this weak version in supporting the idea.

But I don’t think this weak version satisfies anyone because that’s not quite what people mean by the universe being computational. So the next step is to define what exactly a computation is and what would constitute evidence of it. One definition of computation is just the calculation of mathematical results. This can be achieved in a variety of ways. There are register machines, stack machines, graph rewriting systems, and other forms of symbolic manipulation according to a strict set of rules. It has been shown that The Turing machine model has been proven equivalent to all of them if a Turing machine can be modeled within the system. It is called “Turing complete” and can fully model any process in another Turing machine. By this view, a computation would be a unit of symbolic manipulation in such a system. A world that is “computational” on some level should thus contain physical laws at a low level which lend themselves to some Turing complete system.

In another sense calculation could be seen as synonymous with some discrete or boolean logic. Although there are analog computers, I don’t think these are really what people have in mind when they’re proposing this idea.

But what about on a physical level? There were physical calculators and even computers before there were electronic ones. They were made of many parts with highly specified dimensions in specific places connected in specific ways. It is designed to transfer kinetic energy with high efficiency across various specific paths and release potential energy from a reservoir. I would call that sort of device a “mechanism” or a collection of mechanisms. In the end I think what we consider to be a “computation” might best be defined as a mechanism that operates on other mechanisms. In other words, it changes the paths along which the energy flows from the reservoir through the matter composing the machine.

Such mechanisms only represent “calculations” when we specifically assign meaning to the physical results of those mechanisms. In order to consider a physical process like a sand grain knocking other sand grains and causing a little sand avalanche to be a mechanism, most would consider that the sand grains must have been arranged on purpose and with that would come some meaning or a model associated with that display. The computational universe hypothesis then would have to imply that each grain of sand was intentionally arranged as part of a greater calculation.

So if we’re going to say that the universe is “computational” we need to use one of those definitions of computation, or use another. So then the next question is: in what way is the universe “computational”?

There’s an unfalsifiable version of the statement where we just assume everything that exists was put in that particular place for a reason for the purposes of appropriately simulating something we don’t understand. Sure, that’s a possibility. But there’s no way to verify this claim. So let’s just assume that we’re talking about a hypothetically falsifiable version. Some questions remain. We’ve defined computations, but in what way exactly are we proposing that these calculations mediate reality?

To conclude that the universe is computational, we should expect at the lowest levels to observe something along the lines of discrete logic, stack machines, register machines etc. But the fact is, even in Wolfram’s model as far as I can tell they do not necessarily. In his “Ruliad” every possible sequence of computations is playing out and we sample those which we have access to.

But let’s do a thought experiment let’s imagine we’re in a stream in which vortices of different sizes are constantly being created. Some vortices dissipate while others interact to form longer-lasting or larger structures. Occasionally, these interactions produce a mechanism that sustains itself for significantly longer than normal, ingesting the energy from various vortices and outputing new ones, making it more likely for similar mechanisms to emerge. There are an infinite number of different interactions that can take place. Discrete logic isn’t inherent to these interactions, it only emerges, as do the rewrite rules. And yet, the dynamics that persist the longest will have some discrete nature to them. This does lead to the question of: why can this discrete logic emerge from a continuous medium? And why is it that the objects exhibiting this combinatorial behavior persist longer. But it’s certainly not evidence that a rewrite rule is the most fundamental part of reality.

And yet a computational model is the best we can do. If we are some agglomeration of vortex machines made of vortices, we can only register changes into our system via discrete vortex logic. We would expect in a system like this with an emergent Ruliad that there would be “errors” in its rewrite rules because some vortices would be too large or too small to have the expected effect. If every rewrite rule is generated, then that means by introducing random rewrite errors, we’re almost certainly reducing the number of possible paths, so that could lead to some testable hypothesis to distinguish between the emergent vs fundamental Ruliad. But until that test can be done: by the same logic that people use to conclude the universe is a simulation, we can say - there are many more ways to achieve an emergent Ruliad than there are to have a fundamental Ruliad. Therefore, the probability of an emergent Ruliad is much higher.

Ultimately though, no matter what, the best model we will ever come up with \*will\* be have computational aspects. It \*will\* be modelable as a hypergraph of some kind. And not only that but observations and computations will be fundamental aspects of the model. Why is that? Because the process by which we acquire information is computational. We make observations. We record them. We then update estimates of various hypotheses based on that new evidence. Not as individuals, but us as institutions. We can “know” things in other ways, but they will not be disseminated as scientific fact. Specifically academia has this overtly computational way of interacting, but most modern institutions do so on some level.

They create and propagate policies. Policies define processes which are meant to be carried out by someone performing a certain role. Sometimes it’s not a person performing the role. This is a hint that institutions are something greater than the people who make them up. Agents like machines, or animals, or even other institutions can be substituted into a role in many cases. Institutions are on some level like those vortices.

We have a specific way of interacting with institutions. We are essentially fungible from their perspective. We are given an arbitrary ID to distinguish us. Here’s an example of the clash between humanity and a human acting as an agent on behalf of an institution:

The guy working at the airport in this story is executing an algorithm. He's intentionally suppressed his common sense in service of accurately executing it. All laws and policies are ultimately a form of algorithm. We can work together in more ad-hoc ways on small scales, but if we want to have a system for organizing thousands of people, or compiling thousands of years of knowledge across civilizations, it's going to be algorithmic.

Academia is not ultimately so different. While physicists aren’t given a “physics id”, indicating that individuals are not so fungible in that algorithm, the group state is still arrived at via some kind of consensus algorithm. They have the more common kind of fungibility at the university which sponsors them, where they are given an id.

This is all to say that in interacting as these institutions, we are akin to the vortex machines. In order to assess what we’re looking at, we have to probe things with those vortices. I.e. the elements which compose us. Institutions are composed of data and physical processes or mechanisms which modify that data according to certain rules.

We should expect any theory of everything to have those as the basic elements as well. And that seems to be what we’re arriving at. We can use information theory to very directly poke at how we arrive at collective state as institutions. We may ultimately be able to describe the conveyance of force and mass-energy equivalence through information theory as well in a way that includes our own place in the system.

I believe we already have the tools to do this if we consider the state space of our model to be the Shannon alphabet and each observation a message. We could then draw a correspondence with the free energy principle to suggest that we arrive at the model which minimizes surprise (i.e. entropy). And in doing so we essentially assume the principle of least action. It comes from the fact that if we observe energies that are not explained by our model, we keep trying new models until we “explain” that energy by accounting for something else in the model.

In other words, we say the model is wrong if the principle of least action is not held. Therefore it holds for any model we consider correct. Similarly observations in quantum mechanics can either be intentional interactions with a sense, or just any physical interaction. But the consistent part is that they are accounted for in the model, either implicitly or explicitly. If a diffraction pattern suddenly disappeared in the output, we would infer that there was an interaction/observation that we didn’t otherwise note, and we would use that to explain the data. If we were observing something downstream and an interaction occurred that we didn’t know about, its effects might be grouped together into “quantum randomness”, or similarly explained as a problem with the experimental setup.

If a researcher presented data with several instances where the diffraction pattern did not exist but did not explicitly account for some kind of interaction in the model, observed or hypothetical, then their data would indicate major deviations from predicted behavior, just like someone studying mechanics with a ball and a ramp that has a big bump in the middle. They would either remove the bump, or account for it in the model. In other words, our response to surprisal in our models is to either update the model or update the environment, and this ultimately is a process that maintains both the free energy principle and the principle of least action.

This correspondence should give us a foothold into applying information-theoretical principles to physical reality. For instance the shannon-nyquist theorem would might have potential observable effects in the quantum realm.  
  
And while it’s interesting to think about the Ruliad and all that, I believe much more good for humanity can be done by understanding our institutions and how they work in the immediate term. In fact it seems to be something we need to start working on ASAP.