---
title: "Observation Constraint And Mass"
date: "2025-02-09"
draft: false
---

Let’s consider observation. Let’s say we observe that the particle is on the left half of a box, and so gain 1 bit of information. Quantum collapse suggests that this requires entering an energy state of 4x the ground state. If we simply remove 1/2 the box all together, that energy state would be entered permanently, which means that 4x the ground state energy would have to be put into the system to reduce the volume. We can’t have gained 1 bit of information in each case. Perhaps we could say in the first case that we’ve actually gained some number of bits \* seconds. But that would imply that gaining 1 bit permanently gives us infinite bits. More reasonably we could say that the latter case we’ve gained 1 bit \* s for every second the system persists in that state. So the observation produces k \* 1 bit \* s, where k is some constant that is related to the decay rate of the information. This would be related to the temperature by definition, as well as perhaps the volume of the state space.

We can model this as the establishment and release of a constraint. Upon observation, we establish a constraint, which entails some shared state between us as the observing system, and the object. We could call this shared state entanglement, and since it it a constraint it inherently comprises some potential energy. Immediately after, we release that constraint, allowing symmetry to be broken again. The bit is lost as we become less certain about where it is. In the time immediately after we make the observations, it’s very unlikely that it’s flipped sides unless the temperature is very high, so we still have some of that information. However if we check some time later that’s significant relative to the size of the box and temperature, the information we had about the particle’s position decays completely.

Another way of looking at this is that the constraint on the system decays. In order to consistently provide that constraint, we must sample the system at some certain frequency. The shannon nyquist theorem would suggest we have to sample at at least 2x the maximum wavefunction frequency of interest to create a “lossless” picture of what’s happening in the box relative to that frequency of interest. Higher-frequency signals will be lost, however. That means higher-energy signals. So that sample rate would not losslessly record the dynamics of either a small particle going much faster, which obviously corresponds to things that might be considered noise, or a particle whose mass gives them a higher-frequency wavefunction than the frequency of of interest. It’s not clear to me what the latter would correspond to.

By continually sampling the system at a certain rate, we’re keeping the system in a state of having free energy. If we stopped sampling, the information about the system would decay and the entropic energy term would increase. By continually sampling, we are constraining the system with respect to our system. That constraint is mediated by our model, which provides the ability for us to “send messages” to the system in the form of doing work on it, as well as the system to “send messages” to us in the form of us making observations of it.

In essence, we can view a persistent constraint as a series of observations (which must occur at a certain rate to convey the constraint with perfect faithfulness?). In doing so, when we consider building up a mass via the collapse of infinitesimal masses’ probability distributions into one via the establishment of complete symmetry between the particles, that establishment of constraint entails a sample rate, (which would perhaps be related to the energy by Planck’s relation).

This could be a model which allows us to move the energy required from infinitesimal masses into the sample rate required to correlate states among the various state spaces which have been collapsed into the single mass state space.

If we consider that for each system which has had its states correlated with our mass, we should have to make some “observations” to correlate that state, then we could potentially treat a mass as equivalent to some state volume which has been collapsed via this process. If we consider that a certain number of samples per state per second must be taken to maintain the correlation, then we could relate the number of states to a sample rate. And if we also relate that sample rate to the Planck relation and shannon-nyquist theorem, we can assess the number of (states \* seconds) that are contained within a certain mass.