---
title: "Planning Programs And Constraint"
date: ""
draft: true
---

If we accept that [mechanical coupling is a form of internal energy](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/mechanical-coupling-and-internal), then we can start to get a foothold in quantifying it. The increase in internal energy will certainly be proportional to the combined masses of both of the original systems. The constraints applied to each system will also combine to create increased mutual constraint, depending on the type of coupling.

Planning, then can be considered the process of developing a mechanism. Neural connections provide potential couplings between different parts of the brain. As Alicia Juarrero expresses in Dynamics in Action, a decision takes the form of a set of possible alternative methods of performing a certain task. A plan is then a set of these possible alternatives along with their dependencies. Juarrero calls this set of alternatives a “Contrast space” in chapter 12.

Take sitting, for example. If you decide you want to sit, you can sit with your legs crossed on the floor, sit in a chair, sit on a log, etc. All of these can fulfill the goal of sitting, but they each require different things. One requires a chair, one requires a log, one requires legs that are flexible enough. If you don’t have one of the requirements, then acquiring it become a dependent task. If you decide you want a chair, acquiring a chair becomes a dependent task. If you can’t find one, maybe you settle for the log.

As Juarrero suggests, awareness of alternatives combined with awareness of the direct downstream consequences of a choice allows something to be intentional. So, a plan would then be a chain of these hypotheticals combined with some understanding of their downstream consequences and the relationship sub-goals have to the overarching goal. However there’s another aspect to a plan, which is assessing requirements and possible required contexts.

The general structure of a plan which we just laid out—a set of alternative steps along with their dependencies—is also the structure of a computer program. At base, each program is a set of conditionals, which comprise the alternative methods, as well as further instructions that get called when a conditional jump is executed. While the code is executing, the hypothetical instructions may never be experienced, and yet those hypotheticals exist in what we would call the “program”. So the program may contain code that is never be executed in reality, and yet without that hypothetical branch, the program would not be “correct.” Meaning, it would not fulfill the intended goal state of the program writer under certain conditions.

We can also discuss how sensory processing and neural nets also fit into this puzzle, although they are not actually executing plans, but perceiving. They are encoding the outside world into a context which can be used to choose among a set of alternatives.

### Developing a Plan

In developing a plan, the final task is generally the one that completes the goal. Look at a set of instructions. Pretty invariably the last step is either the end product, or some optional step to modify the end product. Each step along the way is achieving some sub-goal which is required to build either the end product, or some other sub-goal. So in a plan, the downstream consequences matter in the sense that they are part of a larger goal you are trying to achieve. So it’s not just that you’re aware of the consequences of a sub-goal, it’s that you’re specifically aware that your end goal is one of the downstream consequences of a decision that makes it intentional. In the process of forming a plan, we similarly can assess these alternative subgoals, discard those that are inappropriate, and flesh those out which seem promising. A goal can be assessed as incorrect, which would mean that the structure of the hypotheticals and dependencies is inappropriate to the task. We should be able to assess the amount of work required to constrain the chain of probability distributions to a certain degree, and in doing so we can assess the amount of information that has been created, or the negentropy.

This means that for a program or plan to be correct, it must correctly consider hypothetical alternative subgoals, whether or not the conditions are experienced which cause those subgoals to be acted upon. This is similar to programs. In determining whether the internals of a program are appropriate for a task, a dependent type system is required to assess the actual logic of a function. Traditional type systems don’t assess the internal logic of a function. In defining constraints to a program, like dependent types, or a required output for a training data set, we should be able to assess the minimum number of observations required to reach that level of constraint. Applying a dependent type to a plan is a form of constraint. Reducing the activation threshold of a certain subgoal is a form of constraint. This means that these are forms of internal energy. This internal energy takes the form of potential energy.

### Executing a Plan

In executing the plan, context might help you select from among the alternatives. The number of required dependencies of these tasks might affect the anticipated total energy of the plan. Without explicitly breaking it into sub-goals, we can easily intuit that sitting on a log takes less effort than making a chair from the log and sitting in it. We don’t need to think that through. Perhaps we have some awareness that a sub-goal with no dependencies is automatically lower-energy than a sub-goal with dependencies. Also, upon achieving a goal, there is a sense of resolution. So we could suggest that this is a local equilibrium state—the state in which there are no more dependent tasks to accomplish in relation to our goal. being equilibrium means it’s a lower-energy state. The chain of dependencies then could be envisioned like stream channels arriving into a main channel. In the process of executing a plan, in order for it to be executed properly, the hypotheticals branches which are not appropriate should be ignored, and the subgoals which are relevant should have their thresholds reduced.

Deciding upon the way to make a table leg then would involve generating a set of alternative ways of achieving the goal, then assessing whether the requirements are met for each alternative, while also conforming to the constraints due to the root goal.

However, this doesn’t help us visualize the requirements or context. Determining whether a required context is present would require assessing the ability to drop in each of those stream channels. Apparently in order to drop into those stream channels, there is something required. At each sub-goal, we will require different things. If building a chair, when we the legs, we will need a certain amount of wood, and the seat will require another amount of wood. Upon achieving each leg, we will have consumed that amount of wood. So, at the top of every stream channel, we must have some indication of all the requirements needed from downstream.

This is where neural nets fit in. The output layer of the net represents the contrast space. The level of activation of each label might represent the presence or absence of the necessary requirements and dependencies of the task, or in other words, the energy required for a plan to fulfill the requirement. Depending on the weight of each of these, a certain dependency may or may not reach the level of being considered “available”. If the dependency is not available, that means another channel must be found which does label all the requirements as available or achievable.

In this way, you could view the neural net as a sort of muscle which changes the shape of the “action channel” depending on the perceived context, or the inputs that arrive from the input layers. The input layers perceive whether a certain object is present in a certain place etc.

This insight allows us to find a connection between perception and behavior. The sub-goals of perception essentially sync the context from reality as perceived by the input layer. Activating a certain element in the context is itself a behavior. Knowing that you have a piece of wood that will work as the chair leg requires an active transformation of the context. That tra

Alternatively, the labels of the neural net could represent the

||| This also provides insight into how neural nets work. In a neural net, the resulting labels represent the alternative methods. The layers leading to that output layer provide “dependencies.” The stream metaphor breaks down a bit here, because the upstream channels only converge into one downstream channel. A neural net’s behavior in this metaphor would be like if it simultaneously converged into a downstream channel for each possible plan, with each downstream channel having a dam that opens up depending on which upstream channels were flowing into it. |||

### Plans as Mechanisms

So now we can go back and look at the energy required for making a plan. What we should be able to do is take a information-based approach which analyzes the constraints on the relevant probability distributions, and compare it to a mechanistic approach, where we assess the behavior of the mechanism as descent across a potential.