---
title: "Precision Time And Money"
date: ""
draft: true
---

Previously I wrote about the relationship between the time to reach a goal and possibly the money required. Using a little bit of speculative physics, I proposed a square root relation between them. There’s an often told adage “you can get something done right, cheap, or quickly, but you can only choose 2”.

I believe there is a deeper relationship underlying this concept. Ultimately it’s based on the idea that institutions are composed of bonds between its members and those bonds are a form of energy. One type of such bonds is a transaction, in which money is exchanged for a good or service. In this case the money can embody energy as well. This ultimately flows from deeper ideas that institutions exhibit the same thermodynamic properties as life does.

This means that if we want to explore why we can only get something done 2 of right, cheap, or quickly, we should look into what those terms mean from a physics perspective. Adding precision into the equation, we can take concepts from [this essay I wrote previously](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/precision-information-and-work), in which I demonstrated how we can determine that a certain amount of energy must be required to reach a certain level of precision. We didn’t establish any quantitative guesses about that relationship.

However, we can establish the relationship based on what we know about constraint, energy, and probability. Let’s take a tolerance. If we require that an object exhibit a dimensional with of 1 meter +/- 1cm, then what we’re really asking is that one side be constrained to a certain position relative to the other side. What we’re trying to do is take the probability density function of one side relative to the other, and reduce all positions to 0 as nearly as possible, except those in a certain range.

In doing this, we’re reducing entropic energy. We’re converting some into free energy. If we reduce the acceptable range even more, we’re converting even more into free energy. We can use the entropy formula to determine that if all states are 0 outside our tolerance, and we have n states within our tolerance, we have - Sum 0\_n ( (1/n) \* ln( 1 / n) ) for the original tolerance, and when we halve that, we end up with Sum 0\_n/2 ( (2/n) \* ln ( 2 / n) ). In other words we’ve increased the information by 1 bit. If we halve it again, we will increase it again by 1 bit. We can multiply this by the temperature to get the entropic energy which has been converted to free energy.

Reversing this relationship means that if we want to double the precision of a process, or halve the tolerance, the \*best\* we can achieve is a logarithmic amount of energy for a constant temperature.

This is counter-intuitive because costs can increase sharply for very tight tolerances. So perhaps the model is way off, or perhaps it’s just missing some things.

Let’s consider a volume of gas. If we halve the volume, we’ve reduced the entropy by 1 bit. However the pressure will increase, too. The next halving of volume will take twice as much energy because it will be working against twice as much pressure. We’ve also increase the temperature In this situation, the first model fails to account for the increased pressure, or increased number of collisions on the container. [This is described in the fundamental thermodynamic relation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_thermodynamic_relation). The second model accounts for the increase in pressure corresponding to the decrease in entropic energy, which also explains why the amount of energy required to reduce the entropy by 1 bit increases when it should otherwise stay the same. The increased pressure amounts to an increase in mutual constraint between the gas and the wall of the containing chamber. Previously I discussed how [mutual constraint is a form of internal energy](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/mutual-constraint-as-internal-energy?r=5yzdb).

Similarly, I discussed previously how [mechanical coupling is a form of internal energy](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/mechanical-coupling-and-internal?r=5yzdb). This means that setting up a mechanism requires more energy. I would speculate that a process which is fully automated and established will behave as discussed where increased precision requires logarithmic energy, but processes which are not automated and established will require the creation of new mechanisms and relationships. This means an increase in internal energy of the system, which means that achieving the increased precision requires more energy than would otherwise be necessary.

However according to these thoughts, accounting for the increased internal energy not only counters the logarithmic nature of the relationship between precision and energy, but it reverses it to become an exponential relationship in the other direction. This is a huge swing requiring that a lot of energy be accounted for. That increase in internal energy must be very large. with respect to the increase in precision. Perhaps this increase has to do with not just a single dimension of precision, but its relationship to a larger system in which every component must become more constrained in order to produce that higher precision.

In order to confirm / make sense of this, we need to consider other examples. Let’s think about refining metals. Once a process is established, there’s a minimum required energy that corresponds to the reduction of entropy of the chemical reaction. However, before the process is established, there’s a period of investigation which requires trial and error. This period of investigation can be seen as a process for establishing the process.