---
title: "Quantum Mechanics And Institutions"
date: "2024-10-23"
draft: false
---

The process of wave function collapse seems similar to me to the way [entropy depends on the model you choose](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/observers-and-entropy). The wave functions collapse because you add new information and change the calculations to show that the wave function has collapsed.

Maybe I’m misunderstanding, but from what I gather, it’s not a physical process, it’s a computational one. I’ve been told that “observer” is a misnomer, because if a speck of dust gets in the way of a split beam, it would destroy the interference pattern too. However our model would only anticipate a destroyed interference pattern if the dust were part of the model. The dust would only become part of the model if an experimenter observed it.

What I would tend to say is that observation does change the behavior of a system. The addition of new information changes the behavior of the model as it gets integrated into the system which is using the model. If it’s a cat doing the observation, then the cat updates its model. If we observe the cat reacting in accordance to an updated model, we could then update our model too.

Where institutions come in is that science is inherently an institutional behavior. There are strict procedures that must be followed. There’s no room for “common sense” editing of data. Perhaps the process of modifying the model to acknowledge a collapsed wave function could be considered a collective perception or observation.

If we make a certain observation by ourselves, follow no particular procedure, and then tell no-one, it’s could never be the basis for a scientific model. It could never be evidence for a scientific theory. It could, however, change our behavior. In such a case, the information has been integrated into our personal consciousness, or our personal system. The photon which was the subject of observation will have been absorbed by some particle of our body. It \*must\* do some physical work on our body in order for it to register.

If we record it as part of an experiment, the particle will still be observed.. this time by some instrument. The instrument itself is also part of our collective system. A system which is not aggregating energy could not produce instruments to make such observations. The tool is part of a larger system. It was built within a context. Without the context of a society which is trying to make observations, it would never have been built. It’s a part of the system. And the observed photon does work on that instrument in order for it to register the photon.

Just like we have photoreceptors in our eyes that transmit signals into our brains, the instrument which absorbed the photon… presumably a photoreceptor of some sort, transfers information into a large processing mechanism. It can’t transfer the entire photon holistically. It transfers a signal. It must register some measurements along some degrees of freedom before forwarding the information to the higher-level processor.

It may do that through us. We might read a number and write it onto a piece of paper, and give that paper to someone, or enter it into another computer. However that observation eventually gets processed through some data analysis and presented via a peer-reviewed journal. From there may eventually affect the collective actions taken by our society either by being presented in the press, or as part of a summary presented to government officials. Just like our eyes might seem to ignore a single photon, so might a single observation end up not seemingly affecting anything. In reality that single photon might have increased the sensitivity of the receptor to the next photon.

That photon did work on the instrument, but in turn it also created information within our collective system. It made a slight change to the probability of one collective behavior over another by affecting our collective adoption of a certain model. This change in probability requires energy.

Perhaps the collapse of the wavefunction is a representation of information coming from outside a system, entering the system and being absorbed by it. Once absorbed in this way, it can no longer reverberate in a complimentary phase with another photon in order to be a piece of a diffraction pattern. As information, it is no longer a holistic wavefunction. It no longer can be measured among degrees of freedom other than the one it was measured on. Now it’s a bit, or a piece of information that can be passed around throughout the system by triggering various mechanisms based on the value that was assigned to it as an observation. This interpretation seems to be basically a fusion of the [Quantum Bayesianism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_Bayesianism) and [Relational Quantum Mechanics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_quantum_mechanics) interpretations of quantum mechanics.

In tracing the flow of information through institutions, we see this process plainly. We see the abstraction and loss of “truth” that comes with measuring something along one dimension, and processes which get triggered according to those abstractions, whether they make sense or not. This likely also happens for other systems which behave, however without direct access to the internal states of those systems, we would not consider a collapse to have occurred unless we define a connection between some external state we can measure and an internal state of that system which would be affected by collapse.

On the level of the individual human brain, this could also explain how quantum effects are necessary for consciousness. At each new layer of processing, the abstraction occurs when behavior from a lower scale is measured and a collapse occurs, which in turn triggers a discrete response at the higher scale. At that point, a larger process with more momentum is has been kicked off and is underway. That process will eventually be abstracted in a similar manner by some down-stream processor.