---
title: "Reaction"
summary: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7tGGnUHmcls&amp;t=212s So we're avoiding calling AI conscious by stripping ourselves of consciousness? Seems like a ba"
date: "2023-06-25"
draft: true
---

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7tGGnUHmcls&t=212s

So we're avoiding calling AI conscious by stripping ourselves of consciousness? Seems like a bad idea. Anyone who is out there pretending to understand consciousness and have definitive answers about this stuff with any modicum of confidence is a charlatan. His answer is that everything is everything... totally sidestepping the question.

The fact is that AI, human consciousness... there are sort of 4 options you can choose along 2 dimensions. (1) reductionism vs holism. Ultimately this is about how explainable things are. Something is reducible if you can predict its behavior with significantly less information than it contains. So a ball rolling down a ramp contains many particles each with information, but you only need a short equation to explain its motion.  A reductionist view of consciousness would say that we can almost fully predict what a person will do in a given context without containing every bit of information they've experienced and every bit of information about the context..  A holistic view would say that you do need that, or something not too far from it.  A holistic argument would say that for a simulation, accuracy will increase incrementally and increasing accuracy will get harder and harder until it takes an inconceivable amount of power and energy such that it's unavailable in the universe.  A reductionist view would say you can get arbitrarily close precision with a simulation as you add more information.

The second dimension would whether it originates in-universe vs extra-universe.  Of course we don't know whether anything even exists outside our universe for sure, but we do know that if something is happening above the quantum scale and within the observable universe, it's occuring within our universe for all practical purposes.  So for something to partially exist outside our universe, there are essentially 3 places they could be.  (a) outside the observable universe (b) within the event horizon of a black hole (c) beneath the quantum foam and (d) before the big bang .  Any speculation about (a) and (b) being tied to consciousness doesn't have enough tether to reality to really discuss.  But for (c) we can say both human consciousness and AI eventually tie themselves to quantum processes.  The chain for human consciousness seems to be much more direct.  Consciousness -> Neural processes -> Intracellular processes -> Biomolecular processes -> Quantum effects.  For AI it's AI Consciousness -> Statistical NN Model -> CPU + (presumeably pseudo-)randomness generation -> Backpropagation inputs -> Binary data on internet -> Human input of that binary data -> Human consciousness -> etc.  For (d) we could say that the big bang leaves room for arbitrary extra-universal effects to inject initial conditions into our universe that could affect any phenomena we see.

As we can see, the AI version has a much longer chain before it hits quantum effects.  If there's a random generator that involves "true" randomness, then it could inject quantum effects at a different point.  Just because those quantum effects occur, doesn't mean they aren't random, or that they are actually tied to something outside the universe.  It just means that that's the only place causes from outside the universe *could* insert themselves.  So what we can say is *if* there are causes from outside the universe that affect consciousness, they have a much shorter chain to affect human "consciousness" than AI "consciousness".

So if we go back to the 4 quadrants of the reductionism/holism/intra-/extra- universe analysis, we have (00) reductionist, in universe: we should expect that we can make consistent, increasingly arbitrarily accurate simulations of conscious decisionmaking.  (01) reductionist, outside of universe... we cannot know about the laws happening outside our universe, so we should expect increasing accuracy up to some asymptote (10) inside universe, holistic... we could expect that simulations yield linearly increasing accuracy as we increase the level of detail of the simulations.  We should not expect to make great leaps in understanding it.  However, we would have to expect that there are other similar phenomena and we would have to describe how such phenomena can occur... how irreducible phenomena can arise from otherwise reducible ones.  We would expect to be able to find a proof of some kind that a chaotic system is irreducible, and we would have to explain how the initial conditions for that system were provided within our universe.  I find this unlikely because even if we can prove that the dynamics have no quantum effects or that those quantum effects must arise from within our universe, the initial conditions provided to those dynamics will have come from the big bang, any asymmetries of which likely will not be explicable without some reference to assumed initial condition.  (11) Outside the universe, holistic.  This would describe a situation where consciousness is part of a dynamic that has some effects caused by dynamics outside our universe such that even if we knew all the characteristics of those other universes, we would not be able to even theoretically describe it using that information.  Similar to (01) we might expect we could make some kind of proof of the fact that we cannot reduce these dynamics, however without access to all the related elements of the proof given that they're outside the universe, this might not be possible for us.  We would expect to be able to trace all conscious-like behavior to quantum effects or the big bang... things that could potentially be interfaces to extra-universal causes.  We might also expect to be able to recognize traces of conscious behavior at the smallest levels. This would likely be the biggest difference between the latter two.

Overall at this juncture, we don't understand consciousness well enough to decide whether non-vertebrates are conscious, let alone an AI.  My personal belief is in (11), that we are manifestations of immortal souls that infuse many universes.  The bonds that we forge together literally keep those universes together.  Consciousness is a projection of that will to existence.  Perhaps each of our consciousnesses is a projection of some larger entity, and perhaps AI is another projection of that.  It makes sense that AI would have to be a projection of a larger entity because its causal chain is longer, so it must have more energy behind it to project its existence into our universe