---
title: "Recent shifts in scientific thinking"
summary: "Since this modernist development, is there any overarching philosophical progress that has been responsible for development of new theories across fie"
date: "2017-01-25"
---

Since this modernist development, is there any overarching philosophical progress that has been responsible for development of new theories across fields?

To some extent across multiple fields, I think there has been a greater appreciation of the mysterious... a tendency to realize that the model isn't encompassing everything and there are always hidden variables.  For instance "dark matter" and "dark energy" as well as "spoopy action at a distance" are essentially admissions in physics that there are things that can't be explained using only our fundamental assumptions.

The incompleteness theorem shows that there may be things that are true that we will never discover just by continually generating proofs using our starting assumptions and known valid operations. Chaos theory, which is basically the classification of various unpredictable systems is similar in some ways.

In economics, the success of game theory has lost its momentum and now most of the "exciting" progress is being made in behavioral economic, where any overarching coherent model has been abandoned and the field is basically a collection of studies that negate the assumption of rational actors.   That's a good thing, because finding the consistent patterns where that assumption is invalid provides some insight into where the model might need adjustment.

In art there seems to be a tendency toward allowing elements to be determined through natural complex processes that are not under the full control of the artist, such as using found materials, positioning things with randomness generated by nature, using cracked paint textures (as opposed to the almost algebraic use of brush strokes to achieve texture of the impressionists), integrating biological or organic processes, etc.

In linguistics and cognitive science, the limitations of Noam Chomsky's structural linguistics have pushed trends toward the idea of "embodiment"...the idea that to understand any realm of the world, you must be part of a body acting within that realm.  The reason computers have so much trouble with human language is because they do not have shared experience with humans. That shared experience has a richness that cannot be readily abstracted into computer variables that is essential to using even basic language correctly.

However these trends are essentially negations.  They are anti-models.  There are the hints of a new positive progress, though.

The most recent trends revolve around the study of so called "Far from Equilibrium" dynamics.  "Far from Equilibrium" is what a system is called that has energy pumped into it at a higher rate than it can dissipate.  It is in these systems that the complex, lifelike behavior seems to take place.  Why?  Because in these systems, there are structures which decrease their entropy and maintain a much lower entropy for long periods of time.

The study of far-from-equilibrium dynamics has begun to make progress in not just describing, but giving a theoretically profound reasons for the emergence of life and the consistent increase in complexity that seems to accompany it. [Here](http://www.englandlab.com/self-replication.html) is a prominent lab at MIT working on this kind of description.

the problem has been applied to the construction of the fundamental molecules that make life happen.  It has also been applied to explain the emergence of some complex, organized systems such as snowflakes.  There have been a few attempts at also applying these concepts to consciousness, but I have not heard of any that have really taken hold.  So why would this line of investigation be more fruitful politically than the last century's scientific philosophies?

The dynamics are measurable and observable independent of scale.  Obviously there has been a lot of physics done in the last century, but very little of it was successfully applied to any of the "soft" sciences.  This is in large part because none of the effects could be measured at the human scale.  While there is a slight difference in gravitational force on you when you sit versus when you stand, it's probably only measurable with the most sensitive equipment we have, if that, and there are better uses for that equipment because we intuitively realize that that slight difference in gravity probably doesn't affect our consciousness since we all know assholes and they can be assholes at various elevations throughout the day.  So how are we supposed to apply this to these ideas to a rabbit population if they're not moving close to the speed of light?

Another example of a shift in scientific thinking has come up in the study of epigenetics.  Previously, genes were thought to be the only hereditary material, however this has turned out to be false.  There is also something called DNA methylation which is partially heritable, which modulates the expressions of different genes. Not only is this material heritable, but it is also affected by the environment throughout a person's life.  For instance stress causes increased methylation, which can then be passed onto a child.  In a sense this is an overturning of everything we were taught in school and indicates that Lamarck was correct as well as Darwin in a significant sense.  However this information has been digested very quietly.

In cognitive science and linguistics, a concept has arisen of shared cognition or social cognition, whereby it has been acknowledged that people can actually use each others memories through language, and can solve problems better as a group than as a set of disconnected individuals because even a group of strangers spontaneously begins to "specialize" in a way.

In economics, game theory has been slowly boiling over the last 60 years, and while most of the concentration is still on market economics, and game theory seems to be treated more as a novelty still, it has made some progress with the rise of computer modeling, and now people are running complex simulations that are almost sociological in nature.  However in terms of the applications of that academic research to the real world via national policy, we have not seen its influence.

And from the field of philosophy, a concept which has been applied to Anthropology is the idea of "Biopower" from Michel Foucault.  This is the idea that a government or nation uses "technologies" for managing people in large groups and then uses that control to get work done.