---
title: "Scale Dynamics and Organization"
summary: "I tend to agree with a lot of the criticisms that anarchists profess about our current political structures, but I think anarchy is a horrible excuse "
date: "2014-11-04"
draft: true
---

I tend to agree with a lot of the criticisms that anarchists profess about our current political structures, but I think anarchy is a horrible excuse for an ideology.  Unfortunately, it seems to be the most accessible alternative to current power structures.  But it is not an alternative.  It does not reach an equilibrium, because anarchy is the base state of human existence.  It is the state of existence with no institutions.

While institutions constrain human behavior, they create new possibilities.  In mutually constraining each other's behavior, humans can collectively invest time and resources to larger projects and behavioral plans.  The whole "we're stronger together" shtick.

When those larger projects and plans exceed the scale of an individual human's ability to see the results, it is certainly difficult to be motivated to continue contributing, but that doesn't make them totally not worthwhile.

Regardless, there is a clear tendency for humans to organize at successively higher levels as technology and power structures allow it.  Without that organization, any group of humans who *do* organize will easily be able to take advantage of those who don't.  Biological processes use atoms however they like.  Tribes became city-states, which became loosely associated federations of city-states, which became county-sized empires, which became nation-sized empires, which became colonial empires, which became "superpowers" or neocolonialist industrial complexes, depending on your perspective.  Of course that is a simplification, but in general, the geographic area to which one set of laws applies has increased.  And the number of laws that apply have increased.

If the anarchist movement were to succeed, I don't want to see what would follow.  If the entire western industrial complex were to vanish tomorrow, something equally oppressive would certainly take its place.  Without a set of institutions guiding people to behave in certain ways, large infrastructure projects would be impossible.  Take, for instance, [this gem of an experiment](http://www.vice.com/en_au/read/atlas-mugged-922-v21n10) by some anarcho-capitalists in Chile, or the countless examples of hippie communes or cults that have failed.  You're taking people out of a system that is so engrained, we don't even know what we're missing.  But one thing that a currency, legal system, and defined citizenry (essentially all a nation is) do provide is an environment where you have a reasonable expectation of not getting screwed in a transaction.

I'm sure it's no surprise to most people that an Ayn Rand-inspired collective failed, but it may not be obvious why.  When people make economic transactions through established legal frameworks, it's like an API.  It's an interface with a defined set of expectations.  That's why people expect to use craigslist at their own risk, but have high expectations of ebay, and even higher expectations of amazon.  There are just more rules that sellers need to follow.  When you just put a bunch of people together outside of those frameworks, it is anarchy.  It takes time to develop those systems.  It is the epigenetic process of a society.  Just like an organism has to develop and learn, institutions take time to develop.  People need to communicate to establish these institutional communication frameworks.

In nature, we find that as elements recombine into higher-level structures, that they do so through some form of mutual dependence by performing certain roles in the system.  Some of their degrees of freedom are constrained.  You can't just smash a bunch of atoms together and presume that they will do what you want.  You can't even just take 100 H2 molecules and 50 O2 molecules and get water out of it.  That all develops on its own and the conditions have to be right.

So, the point is, if we try to replace a highly-developed set of institutions with something much less fleshed-out, the vacuum will tend to be filled by a system that represents a more stable equilibrium.  The equilibrium of humans is higher and higher organizational structure to the extent that it can be stable.  So if we remove the highest organizational structures we have, it will not reduce us to having no organizational structure.  Instead, the second highest organizational structure will just increate and propagate itself.

In the case of some revolution, that means that immediately foreign money will begin flowing into the country that doesn't have a government.  Powerful corporations, or warlords, religions, local governments and whatever other organizational structures may have power in the country will begin to increase their effects on people's daily lives to fill the void left by the government.