---
title: "Scale Effects"
summary: "If you're looking at bird migration patterns, the size of the bird and the size of the earth are both important, but in different ways. The size of th"
date: "2015-05-02"
draft: true
---

If you're looking at bird migration patterns, the size of the bird and the size of the earth are both important, but in different ways.  The size of the bird will determine how long it can fly without stopping.  The size of the earth will determine the average strength of wind currents.  These are vastly different scales, yet both would be needed to create an accurate picture that could be generalized to other species.

It's important to determine the information you're looking for and the information you're taking into account.  For instance, if you're looking to predict the number of trees in a certain area, you may be able to get a relatively accurate estimate using information about minerals in the soil, precipitation, and cloud cover.  Then you could determine the average percent of trees that are oaks in that area, and get an OK picture of the number of oaks.  However, if you set about this problem by trying to determine the number of oaks first, and then maples and firs and add them all up to predict the total number of trees in the area, you'd probably have a harder time getting an accurate estimate.

Why does the first method seem so much simpler than the second?  By simply suppressing a detail--species, suddenly there are all kinds of factors you can ignore.  Competition dynamics between tree species, growth rates based on minerals in the soil, etc.  However, if you zoom into a certain part of a forest, the first model may have much, much less predictive power.  There are higher-level details you could treat as constant.   Rather than use cloud cover in your model, you could measure concentrations of certain species in other areas of the forest, and use factors such as elevation and nearby species to develop a comparative model.  It's not that the cloud cover doesn't have an effect, it's just that it's subsumed into the other parameters.

So scale and information are intricately linked.  And it's not just scale in terms of mass and distance.  It's also the energy of a system, and the probability distributions of states along given degrees of freedom.  If you're trying to determine how long it will take before a tire goes flat, it will often depend on the thickness of the rubber.  Unless you are always getting your tires slashed, in which case it depends on tire-slashing factors.  If the frequency of tire-slashing is high enough, it drowns out the effect of the thickness of the rubber and becomes the main effect and with it comes a whole new set of information that is now more relevant in determining how long your tires will last.  No longer is the weight of the car relevant.  Now what's important is what you did to that guy to make him hate you so much.

Now imagine that your tires last about 1 year on average, and the guy slashes your tires once a year on average.  Sometimes your tires will wear out on their own, and sometimes, the guy will slash them.  So whatever affects his slashing rate will be important, but also whatever affects your tire wear rate will be important.  So what happens when his slashing rate and the tire wear rate are both affected by the same variable?

Let's pretend he slashes your tires more often if it's warm, and your tires wear out more quickly when its cold.  In order to determine the effect of the weather on your likelihood of needing new tires, you have to know how strongly the weather affects his slashing rate, and how strongly the weather affects the tire wear rate.  This is what I mean by probability distributions of states along given degrees of freedom.  If it gets really warm, does that mean he will start slashing your tires all the time?  If it gets really cold, will that make your tires wear out super-quickly?  Both of these questions will determine the shape of the probability distribution of needing new tires with respect to temperature.

In this silly example, it's not clear how that has effects, but in more physical examples, the shape of the probability distribution has everything to do with the behavior of the whole system.