---
title: "[script draft] Thermodynamics of society and politics"
summary: "Our society seems to quickly be spiraling down the toilet. Why is that? It’s all due to a lack of information. Lack of information? But we’re inundate"
date: "2023-03-27"
draft: true
---

Our society seems to quickly be spiraling down the toilet.   Why is that?   It’s all due to a lack of information.    Lack of information?   But we’re inundated with more news  and updates than ever before.   

Information has a specific meaning when it  comes to thermodynamics.   It’s easiest to talk about  entropy first.   Entropy  is essentially the  tendency for things to move from  “states”  with more manifestations than ones with fewer.   For instance a set of bowling pins has a narrow range of  ways to be  “set up”… so that set of pins is much more likely to be not set up than set  up,  unless someone is putting energy into the situation

When you’re looking at an  equation describing a physical system which accounts for entropy, entropy is a quantity which essentially accounts for all the possible microstates of a system  that are not accounted for by other terms of the  equation.   For instance if you attempt to account for entropy in an equation  describing the earth  and moon orbiting the sun… energy reduced by things like the flow of tides  getting released as heat into the earth, could be accounted for implicitly as an increase in heat to the system,  rather than separately writing estimated terms out for these factors.

Conversely,  information would then be the energy of the system which is accounted for explicitly in the equations.  The  kinetic energy of the earth due to its velocity,  the potential energy of the moon due to its position in the sun’s gravitational field, etc would be information.  Entropy always increases because the particles arranged in the system will always find new ways to exist, and so more and  more of the energy of the system will be unaccounted by in the  equations which were written down as the system is perturbed  away from that setup   

Another difference between entropy and information is the ability to do useful work.    information is required to  do useful work because without being accounted for in the model there is no way to siphon energy from the system.  Without  some kind of model accounting for the fact that  burning gasoline can push a piston,  there would be no work done by such a piston because even if a piston fired,  it would not be wired into an intention… so the energy would not be part of the work someone was harnessing for a goal.   So while it may technically do work by moving molecules around,  that energy will dissipate into heat eventually because it is not being harnessed

Information and efficiency  are closely intertwined.   Imagine a particle moving along s like trying to stop in a certain region.   Every second it can sample  the environment to determine if it’s to the left or right of  the region.   It has no knowledge of  distance.   It can either accelerate to the left or to the right,  or not accelerate.  As you increase the sampling rate,  you can save this particles time and energy in getting to its destination.   If this particle were searching  for food in those regions and at any moment it had  the ability to acquire information, accelerate  left,  accelerate right, or  digest food,  we can imagine that a  model  that could give insight into how that information works

entropy  increasing has caused problems for some though.    Specifically for living things.   We create gigantic molecules  in very  specific arrangements that would be very unlikely to exist otherwise..  Of the kajillons of ways for some carbon  and oxygens can be arranged,  they specifically  arranged themselves into a lens that projects onto my retina.   Insane  levels of non-entropy.  Somewhere  in our dna and the process of  our evolution, a  model exists to allow energy to be harnessed for that purpose  

But how exactly do these molecules go against entropy?   They  are incentivized  to at the tiniest level.    When a water molecule  is split and an  H is  wandering around inside there,  it might bump into a  carbon chain.   In order for that carbon chain to take advantage of that situation,  it must be able to create a bond with that H.  It must be able to offer that  H some incentive.  what would that look like?   Well in order to get the hydrogen to accept the positional constraints within the  molecular structure,  it must offer it more degrees of freedom in another way.  it does this by giving its electrons access to many more orbitals    even though the hydrogen loses  3  translational degrees of freedom,  its members gain more than that. 

now let’s talk  about groups..  their members,  people, require energy to exist… just like everything else   If a group  extracts more energy from its members on average than it  provides,  it will eventually dissolve.  A group  also must have some constraints or else it is not a group.   If a group exists with absolutely no  constraints on its members,  there would be absolutely no way to distinguish  member from non member.  So it would not be a group in any meaningful sense.   When these members accept those constraints they are still bound by the  2nd  law of thermodynamics.   If membership in the group  is offering  fewer states than non membership,  there  will be a tendency toward non membership unless energy is put into the system.  

this applies to groups  as well as groups of groups,  or societies.  so societies must be offering more ways to exist than people would be able to experience by themselves  if they are to exist in the long run.  in the short term they can use energy to constrain their members.   People can  contribute energy to society or a group that otherwise they would keep for themselves only if they are getting those needs fulfilled..  they need to have access to energy and they need to be able to occupy more states than they would be otherwise… in other words opportunity..

How does a group do this though?  

However we don’t observe societies constantly collapsing.   They must have some resilience in the face of this.   They do because societies are  able to adjust their strategies.   They’re able to listen to their members and change the constraints they impose in order to achieve something for the benefit of their members.  

So that brings us to politics.. the process of a society listening to its members in order to adjust its constraints on those members  in order to preserve itself.   But how does it know what to do?   We have to reach back to information.   The society’s  intentional mechanisms must have a model which allows it to  extract useful work from its environment by adjusting constraints on its members. Its members  are also part of that environment.  what does it mean to extract information?   It means to react to a change in the environment and do physical work as a result.   What does it mean  for a society to do physical work?   Adjusting the constraints/incentives it places on its members.   So we can see that in order for a society to function effectively to survive long term,  it must be able to respond to stimuli from its members  and process that as information.   measuring a society’s ability to substantively adjust constraints based on changes to the environments  is a measure  of the health of a society.   In fact we should be able  to estimate the average lifespan of a society based on factors like its  biomass and  how effectively it can ingest information