---
title: "The Process is the Product"
summary: "When it comes to life, the boundaries between individuals are blurred. Obviously there are separate humans walking around, but we are part of one proc"
date: "2015-05-13"
draft: true
---

When it comes to life, the boundaries between individuals are blurred.  Obviously there are separate humans walking around, but we are part of one process.. the process of propagating a template that continues the process.

Institutions are the same in a lot of ways.  While there are separate governments and corporations, what defines them is not their members, or their language, or even any one rule.  It is the set of things that they end up doing.  An institution is formed when a group of people decide to do something, and then start doing it.  It is a process.  As they continue doing it, they might get money, or some other capital for it.  Or they use capital from other sources to promote it.  Other people might join them, or they might not.  Each action like this will be a subprocess.  If it is not explicitly agreed-up consciously by everyone involved, then it is an implicit process.

If no people join them, it will tend to dissolve quickly.  Either the thing they set out to do won't happen, or it will happen through a different process.  The process can only be partially extracted from its context.   If 2 people try to do something, and then 2 other people do it the same way, it will not be the same process, because the people are different, they will use different words to communicate, and they will be in different locations.   Obviously, we can identify patterns, but different atoms will be shifting around in different ways due to the contextual differences.

Whatever the subprocesses are will place limits on what the ultimate super-process can become.  Cells convert carbon chains into carbon dioxide... this process occurring at a lower level results in human behavior at a higher level.   It correlates to the higher-level human process of "metabolism."  On a higher level, it corresponds to the societal process of consuming fuel for energy.

The lower-level process repeats itself over and over, amplified or suppressed within certain cells, within certain people, within certain geographical areas.  Depending on the context, this process can either occur or not.  Many cells contribute, some don't, and the total sum of all these lower-level processes results in the higher-level process.

Imagine if rather than carbon chains, we metabolized silicon chains.  Would we still burn oil for fuel?  This is a stupid question.  In order for us to metabolize silicon dioxide, rather than carbon, we would need to be living in a world where that made sense.  The context would be totally different.  Would whatever "plants" exist in such a world be made up of silicon chains?  The subprocesses arise from other subprocesses and context.  Millions of years of evolution on our particular planet resulted in carbon chains being used.   We cannot speculate sensibly about something different without speculating about the differences within all those millions of years.

The point is, when an institution forms, whatever processes are used in its formation will dictate its future development.  A society is a set of interlinked institutions that, through complex processes, provide resources to its various parts.  So when you take a fishing village, and you take away their ability to fish, that institution no longer exists as it was.  If it has the processes to adapt, then it is something else, more than just a fishing village.

Little things, like creation stories, or certain sayings store information about what led up to them.  When the main food supply of a community is cut off, suddenly, a few of these sayings don't make sense anymore.  A mother tells the saying to her child, and he mishears it because the context isn't there to help resolve ambiguity.  Maybe it's just the equivalent of a kid hearing "for all intensive purposes" versus "for all intents and purposes"(or whichever way it goes), but with an important saying instead, and the ambiguity is less likely to be resolved later, because if it's a fishing-related phrase, and nobody fishes anymore, it's less likely to be brought up.

Then, there are other sayings dependent on those sayings, and stories dependent on those sayings.  This is how it goes in a rich culture.  For Europeans in the US, very few of these sorts of stories and sayings still go around, because they were lost when we left our homelands, but for a culture that has existed for a long time in one place with a similar economy, they tend to be rich and intricately connected to the context.

These cultural tidbits are often not transferable.  You can't just switch from fishing to shipbuilding without some change in vocabulary and thought process.  Fishing requires patience.  Shipbuilding requires obedience.  So the obedience-related stories might be told more often in a shipbuilding village more than a fishing village.  This will tend to change the behavior of its members. as well as the internal structure of the institution.

However, the death of a culture is not immediate.  As long as there are still little sayings or stories hanging around, these are vestiges of the culture.  If a culture is around for thousands of years, it will develop more cultural information and die more slowly.  If its members are dispersed, it will die more quickly..  If its members communicate less, it will die more quickly.

If an institution is born around the process of sail-making, it will thrive in places where sail-making happens.  It will be composed of sail-makers with sail-related thoughts and vocabulary.

The process of its formation, as well as its internal structure will also influence its character.  If it was formed by someone posting on Craigslist asking for sail-making friends, then you will know that the people who join have access to information from Craigslist.   When it comes time to recruit new members, it is likely that many of them will consider online options.. for that group, they will likely come more easily than off-line.

As for internal structure: let's say they have a rank system and decisions are made a committee of a few of the highest-ranked members.  The ranking system will determine the character and behavior of the institution.  If they are ranked based off of the amount of money they've made from their sails, then it will be a different kind of club than one where they are ranked by how sailory their mouths are, or by how neatly pressed their sailor suits are.  As such a club grew to large size, it is highly likely that status within the recruiting committee would be directly related to whatever it was in the higher-level organization, which is also likely to be the same as it was at formation.  This is because whoever has influence will tend to vote to keep their influence.

So, the US was founded on slavery.  At least 20% of the GDP of the whole US was a direct product of slavery at its inception.   Many sub-industries must have sprung up, and a lot of cultural information was produced and transferred.  For the slaves, much of their original cultural information was lost, but new cultures began to form as well.  To continue to pretend that all of that could be undone in about 50 years of not *explicitly* *specifically* being racist is absurd.  The question is whether it can exist at all without something closely resembling slavery.

Also, people often debate about the role of violence in a resistance movement.  The process is the product.  So if an institution uses violence and gains some ground, they will continue using violence, because it will be an easy, accessible decision.  They will have developed tools for processing that particular kind of decision into action.  It will give the most bang for its buck because it will be further along the learning curve as a tool for that institution. It will also tend towards an internal structure of selecting violent decision makers.  Regardless of whether violence is morally justified in resistance, the practical reality is that it is predictable where it will lead.