---
title: "The Thermodynamics Of Types"
date: "2026-01-09"
draft: false
---

Previously we discussed the idea of [mechanisms as types](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/mechanisms-as-types?r=5yzdb). Quick overview: partial dependency graphs which have “holes” to compose more dependencies can be modeled as types. A mechanism (or any open physical system for that matter) can have many different sub-systems which compose into it as input. For instance, many different things can press a lever. Many different things can cause those things to press the lever, too, so the lever + the thing pressing it can be composed into a larger system or a more refined type.

Now let’s consider this in the context of thermodynamics. A system’s entropy is a function of the number of states which are distinguishable as a proportion of all states in the system. We’ve discussed previously the idea that [observations and constraints effectively allow the entropy into free energy](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/constraints-entropy-and-action). Types can give us a quantifiable way to account for constraints and observations as they come to us, or as our information increases.

So we need to understand how to describe the phase space in terms of types. This whole model has hinged on considering types to represent partial dependency graphs. So let’s start by describing a closed system as a full set of dependency graphs. Let’s consider the old “particle in a box”. Let’s keep it to a 1-d “box” for now. The particle simply bounces back and forth. However it’s notable that it doesn’t teleport. Each spatial coordinate is reached successively after the next. In order to get to one coordinate, the particle must start in an adjacent one. That is a form of causal dependency. These states aren’t just a disconnected set.. they have a dependency relationship with each other.

We’re describing a closed system, so in this case the types we’re describing each only have a single inhabitant. They have no “holes”. The leaves are the initial states. We can initially describe the “type” of our system as the set of all possible starting positions & velocities of the particle. At the next time step, we now have a new type of the system, which includes all possible movements from those initial positions. If we allow completely unconstrained velocity, these next positions could be anywhere in the system. It removes the dependency of the next step on the starting step. However if we say the velocity is such that it goes 1 spatial unit per unit time, we limit the available next states. This also tells us something about the energy of the system. We’ve reduced the number of possible states by adding information to our model.

From the perspective of our dependency graph, our “root nodes” are the set of possible positions at the latest time t = 1, and they each have multiple edges pointing to the possible starting positions at time t = 0. If we choose one of these starting points, then the type of our system becomes the set of “root nodes” reachable from that initial position given the possible velocities, all with causal edges pointing to the initial position.

Now let’s imagine we have a very specific end point we want to distinguish from the rest of the system. So there are 2 distinguishable states A (our special state) and B (everything else). The system is decomposed into a sum of 2 types. Each of these types has certain initial conditions which can lead to it. Our special state A would have much fewer inhabitants than B. In other words, it would have much lower entropy.

We describe this by conjuring types A and B, however in reality these would rely on some mechanism which can distinguish them. If there’s no physical mechanism to distinguish them, the distinction is only theoretical, and cannot have causal consequences. In real life we build detectors. These are mechanisms that produce distinguishable behavior given a range of inputs. For a particle detector for instance we might have some chain reaction which occurs if a large amount of energy is present in a very specific place. Otherwise another chain reaction may occur. In this case we’re coupling distinct potential energy reservoirs to a different states.

Here is an important hypothesis: the internal energy or complexity of the mechanism required to distinguish a states is directly related to the number of inhabitants of the state. Stronger: the physical structure of the mechanism will be describable as a “circuit” correspondending to the type which describes the subset of states it distinguishes.

Conversely, we can consider a mechanism like a lever which takes many kinds of input and reduced them to the same output. For a rube goldberg machine that uses a lever to tip a ball down a ramp, there are many kinds of input that result in the same output. The same potential energy reservoir is coupled to the same adjacent states.. since there is no fork we don’t see distinguishable outputs as long as we don’t care about the details of the ball going down the ramp. This allows us to describe a physical process of coarse-graining in terms of a reduction of reachable distinguishable states in a way that we can quantify. And by composing many of such system we can describe the transition from a continuous analog physical system into a discrete or computational one by considering the progressive refinement of the type as reducing the cardinality of distinguishable states.

Now let’s go back to type theory a bit and look at this system from that lens. The basics of type theory are introduction rules and elimination rules. Introduction rules are basically just the constructors. So this would correspond to describing the dependencies in the graph which make up the physical description of the system. Elimination rules correspond to the propagation of causality. It is a causal dependency graph, so if we collapse a node it means we’re moving from the previous state to the next one. This is analogous to the progression of computation. Note: this should not be taken to imply that the propagation of causation _is_ a computation. It’s just that computer science has developed a plethora of tools for understanding complex dependency graphs and reality can be modeled as a complex dependency graph.