---
title: "Tips To Climb Out Of A Deep Dark"
date: "2024-10-28"
draft: false
---

This is a wild departure from my normal content, but I wanted to inject a little of what I’ve gleaned from my concrete experience into the mix for a couple reasons: 1 - with the election quickly approaching, I feel like I want to counter some of the astroturfing from Theil-funded culture warriors. But also, I see how Gen Z seems to be desperately grasping for father figures, allowing some really bad ideas to be smuggled in alongside some bland paternalistic advice, and I think it’s time to hear another perspective.

Some cracks are starting to show in the Gen Z self help sphere. Figures like Jordan Peterson and Andrew Tate have jumped the shark. Joe Rogan has exhausted his substantive contributions to the national dialogue. Now that the excesses of cancel culture and unconditional deference to “marginalized groups” have faced a huge backlash, it’s become clear that most of them don’t have much to say worth saying outside of that context.

When the economy is doling out $200-$300k / yr jobs to anyone who can lie on their resume about web3 experience, or you can hold 3 remote jobs and barely show up to any of them, or take out a bunch of PPP loans to pay yourself from your podcast about how bad PPP loans are, the advice people are willing to listen to is pretty different. When it’s good, the ones doing well want to hear they deserved it, and the ones who aren’t don’t see as many of their peers struggling, so they have a harder time blaming anything besides themselves.

Perhaps the most effective psychological strategies in those conditions are different from times when you’re seeing friends with PhD’s end up on the streets… when restaurant jobs are looking for 3-5 years experience… and you’re seeing loved ones skimp on food to keep their house, or end up in bankruptcy due to health issues. Either way, it’s no excuse for the rise of genuine Nazism, which also requires a serious case of being pretty stupid and bitter entitlement, but it might explain a bit why it popped up so quickly.

Either way, it appears at least for some people in Gen Z the gravy train has started to run out of steam. And while it’s certainly not as bad yet as what many older generations experienced, the contrast to the consistent manic growth from a few years back is going to have some people feeling like they’re having a bad time. So maybe some thoughts born from the experience of scarcity will be timely.

What I’m hoping to write here is an attempt to provide some thoughts that can fill the gaps left by the existing self-help charlatans while highlighting how Gen Z has improved upon their predecessors, and where they threw the baby out with the bathwater. I guess you could say I’m throwing another hat in the ring.

### Static vs Growth Mindset

First off, one of the most insidious messages that comes from these guys is your typical static mindset. I’ve seen people on reddit posting “I have an IQ of 90, my life is cooked”. The resurgence of bell-curve ideas through social media seems to be what has brought this problem about. The fight against these ideas started in the 80s with Gen X, and was finally largely won in the early 2010s. Unfortunately team diversity failed to follow their own advice. Instead of teaching the weaknesses ideas of those they had just conquered, they ignored or suppressed them, and so a generation kids was left not understanding how to properly put those ideas in their place. This is true of bell curve stuff, but also of concepts like behaviorism which has basically made a resurgence in popular discussions of science.

[I’ve spent some time debunking the “science” behind this](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/debunking-race-science), but long story short - heritability != genetics. Not even close. Heritability represents the \*maximum reasonable guess about genetic influence\*. But there’s plenty of reason to believe the real genetic influence is way overblown within this number. A reasonable guess would be less than half of any heritability number you see, but there’s genuinely no good way to calculate this as of now. The best we can do is look at each gene that we find to be correlated, trace the mechanism of action, and assess the degree of correlation. That’s not even to begin discussing epigenetics and mechanisms for how genes get expressed differently depending on environmental circumstances.

The fact is that this is part of a larger movement to make people believe that the majority of differences among people are innate. This is semi-intentional from a certain group of people who want to believe that they genuinely deserve 1000x more wealth than someone who is obviously working harder than them. They can’t point to anything in the environment, so they point to hidden innate causes where they can manipulate statistics to provide a flimsy semblance of evidence.

The antidote is the growth mindset. It’s a cheesy-sounding concept that was spread via an infographic 10-15 years ago. It’s a lot easier to talk about than to actually embody and believe. One of my favorite bands has a great lyric that I associate with this: “[Are you now or have you ever been in cahoots with the notion that people can change? When history happens again if you do or you did, you’ll be blamed](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hlSHy--KOxs&ab_channel=Drive-ByTruckers-Topic)”. The Nazis didn’t believe people could change. Neither did the Maoists killing people in the Cultural Revolution.

It is a nuisance to those in power because it causes us to focus on their trajectory rather than their position. We can clearly see in Elon Musk that his current trajectory doesn’t match his previous meteoric acquisition of wealth. It makes you wonder why his trajectory is so inconsistent. It’s almost like it has some elements of randomness to it, and maybe he isn’t a super-genius after all. It dispels all the meaning from when Trump calls someone a “loser.” Losing isn’t an inherent trait to anyone… not you either. It’s something that everyone does sometimes. Trump as much as anyone.

### Internalizing the mindset

Believing people can change demands forgiveness. It’s antithetical to the worst of both sides right now. Cancel culture makes no sense if people can change. Neither does eugenics. That forgiveness can also be extended to oneself. If you hold yourself to the same standard as others, no more, no less, then you would forgive yourself if you’re making some effort to improve.

Quitting smoking cigarettes was like this for me. Initially I would quit cold turkey. I would build up a certain level of will-power and exert it. Things would get stressful. I would try, try, try, and then what always happened is I would need to focus on something important. I’d tell myself “ok, I can just have a cigarette so I can get this thing done.” It was a sort of willpower trade-off, as if I have a finite amount of willpower I can extend at once. This would then lead to me continuing to smoke as I needed to keep focusing. Then I would be done with whatever I was working on, but I’d be back up to 1/2 a pack per day.

I eventually shifted my frame of reference. It’s not about whether I’m a screw-up for giving in, or some stoic practice in self-denial. It’s about smoking less, consistently. So I’d still go cold turkey for a few days, just because that first 72 hrs you’ve really got to pull the band-aid off. But after that, rather than pushing myself so hard until I broke and started smoking a lot, I would just allow myself a cigarette if I started to mentally falter, with the goal of averaging 1 a week. Once I got to one a week, I would often skip weeks. I’d find I just don’t need it. Every now and then when I had a very stressful week, I’d smoke 2 or 3, which I’d saved up. But I was always motivated not to fully indulge. Most of the rollover cigarettes I never smoked, because the feeling of doing better than my target felt like doing my future self a favor. It would make the next week easier. Eventually I dropped the goal to once a month, and then I naturally just stopped. The obsession with being mean to yourself is misguided. There are times when being mean to yourself is the right thing to do, but it’s not sustainable as a long-term solution.

So rather than comparing myself to an absolute - 0 cigarettes, I was comparing myself to where I was the week before. Another necessary step was to stop seeing myself as a smoker (or a non-smoker for that matter). Rather than applying a static label to myself, I had to mentally detach from those associations. I started by answering “not really” if people asked me if I’m a smoker. I also stopped hanging around in bars around that time, and that was probably a huge component. Context is a huge component of performance.

### The Science

Ok, sounds nice, but does it actually match reality? Is this just feel-good drivel? [Studies do show that growth mindset can help people improves performance](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/305419071_Growth_mindset_tempers_the_effects_of_poverty_on_academic_achievement) in the face of environmental obstacles. [Studies are also starting to come out about effectiveness in combatting addiction](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6980889/). However I’ll be honest. The studies specifically about the growth mindset aren’t super compelling. There needs to be a lot more research before pretending like this is genuinely a fully scientific approach.

In my opinion, it should be unsurprising that people who believe performance is a reflection of innate value aren’t as motivated to improve when their performance isn’t good. Interestingly, the same people who preach about an “internal locus of control” often seem to take issue with this. They’re unlikely to directly attack the concept of the growth mindset, but they reject its direct ramifications. The growth mindset allows you the freedom to acknowledge that there are many things out of your control, while acknowledging that to optimally improve your trajectory, you should focus on what you \*can\* control. Being more compatible with [a reality that involves things out of ones control](https://spacechimplives.substack.com/p/information-and-the-income-gap) allows the mindset to cause less cognitive dissonance, so it’s easier to maintain.

However there’s an implicit embrace of the static mindset among some academics who place outsized emphasis on the role of genetics in determining relative performance among people. Richard Dawkins’ work is perhaps the most commonly cited to support this idea while still being taken seriously by academia. He originally wrote “the Selfish Gene.” While it provided some insights into genetics (and spawned the word “meme”), it tends to guide people to a brutal philosophy of life. Many people have a knee-jerk reaction to consider brutal-sounding things more realistic because they’re taught “life isn’t pretty.” But the fact is, that’s obviously not true sometimes. Sometimes it’s beautiful. Not acknowledging that is just as silly as pretending life is always beautiful.

Another prominent scientist whose ideas are used to justify a static mindset is Steve Pinker. One of his primary theses is that humans have an innate language capacity. The science isn’t in on that, and it always bothered me how confidently people spread his ideas after reading his book. It used to be considered common knowledge that there was a “critical period” until about age 4 where children could learn language, beyond which native-level acquisition was impossible. This stance has now become controversial again. The general status of the Universal Grammar hypothesis is that we don’t have solid evidence either way. There’s no reason for anyone to be claiming they know one way or the other, and if they claim to, then they probably have an agenda they’re trying to smuggle in.

I wouldn’t claim that we can be confident that language is mostly learned organically, but it is what I personally believe. I fully admit that it is just anecdotal evidence, but now as a father seeing my child learn language… I believe the innate hypothesis less than ever. I saw him practicing words over and over, trying out different variations of grammatical structures.. getting frustrated when they didn’t work, then trying some more. Sure there are obviously structures which give us an expanded capacity to learn language quickly. The parts of our brain that deal with language are much more developed than other mammals, and perhaps there’s a babbling instinct that can initiate a feedback loop. But IMO, the language needs to be learned.

Aside from these guys, their acolytes, and fringe people like Jordan Peterson, the actual science seems to continue to move away from a static genetic view of intelligence, despite the culture war pressure to reverse course. I'm sure there's an influx of young undergrads and even some PhD candidates itching to change that, but I'm guessing their views will meet somewhere in the middle once they actually start reading the literature.

Hopefully the field will spend a little more energy stripping these debunked ideas of their credibility as some kind of “forbidden knowledge,” but I think the scientists have other things they’d like to investigate with their limited resources, so I’m not going to hold my breath.