---
title: "Work and Precision II"
summary: "So in the previous post, we set up the basic of a model to allow us to distinguish between \"intentional\" and \"unintentional\" energy. The \"unintentiona"
date: "2018-04-09"
draft: true
---

So in the previous post, we set up the basic of a model to allow us to distinguish between "intentional" and "unintentional" energy.  The "unintentional energy" has a lot in common with the internal energy of the system.  In a system describing a body moving with overall velocity $$v$$, the energy is $$\frac{mv^2}{2} + TS$$.  If the body does not move in a straight line, then the "wasted" energy can be lumped into the $$TS$$ term, or separated out from it.

But it also bears some parallels with another energy quantity.  In the Gibb's free energy equation $${\displaystyle G(p,T)=U+pV-TS}$$ we have the term TS. This is temperature times entropy... basically energy we can't do anything with because we can't distinguish the microstates.  Those 2 terms--average kinetic energy (Temperature) and bits (or joules per kelvin--Entropy) combine to account for the kinetic energy of the system we can't use.  This is why it is subtracted from the total energy to get the "free" energy.

This entropy is defined by Gibb's formula as $$-\sum{p_{i}ln(p_{i})}$$.  This is basically a measure of the number of microstates being ignored per macrostate that we observe.  We could define our macrostates as simply "T" for target and "~T" for not target and determine which portion of position microstates fall into each position macrostate to determine the entropy of each macrostate.  Note that if each microstate is considered equiprobable, the equation simplifies to $$-ln(1/N)$$ where N is the number of microstates covered by the macrostate.

So we have our particle which moves to position x in time t.  In that same time t, rather than going to point x, it could have gone any number of other places.  There is a probability that it went to point x instead of those places. We'll call that $$p_{t}$$ or "target probability."  So $$1-p_{t}$$ is the probability of ending up anywhere else. An object that is intending to move toward a target can sample its position.  The more often it samples its position, the more quickly it can correct its course.  This means it will be truer to the most efficient path.  In this way, more information from sampling and correcting ones trajectory can result in lower waste energy, so a sample rate can translate to energy through that route.  So in this way we see that more information can reduce the $$TS$$ term of an energy equation, reducing entropy.  In this case the total energy of the system is reduced.  However from a different perspective we could say the energy isn't reduced but made available for work.  If we assume that whatever energy was being wasted while driving this particle would eventually be used for something else.  So how can we describe that amount of energy that information can make available for work?

If we just set the particle down and it happened to end up at the target at time t due to random collisions with other particles, then work wasn't really done on the system.  In order for us to have "done work," we have to actually manipulate the probability.  We are changing $$p_{t}$$ by affecting the probability distribution of its motion.  There are many ways we can physically accomplish this.  We can charge our particle and create an opposite charge where our target is.  We can create a hole and have a massive object pull our particle down into that hole.  We can create a robot that pushes the particle, etc.  Each of these things will affect the probability that our particle ends up at the target state and they all take physical work. In particular the first 2 require imbuing the particle with some potential relative to the target where the target is an equilibrium in that potential space.  In the 3rd example, we're imbuing the robot with the potential and it is then dosing that potential out to the particle bit by bit for many sub-targets.  The target must somehow be stored as an equilibrium in the robot's logic system.  A discrete attractor in some function the robot executes.

So we do work on this particle by changing the probability distribution.  If we put a lot of charge on the particle or create a very steep slope to the bottom of the hole, our particle will reach the target faster.  The larger the potential we create, the faster the object reaches that equilibrium target.  However it may overshoot and then have to come back.  It may oscillate about the target rather than actually come to rest within the target area.  However it will still spend a larger portion of its time in the target area.  In other words, it has a higher probability of being found in the target area than if the potential was not applied.  This should also affect the entropy calculation for the 2 macrostates since the probabilities of being found in the different states are different.

Generally work is discussed in the context of thermodynamics or newtonian physics as either heat energy or kinetic energy.  This kinetic energy is often described as giving velocity to an object--moving it within momentum space.  However due to the relationship between position and momentum space, this same conception of work/energy should be able to translate to specific movement within position space as well.  What I'm trying to get at is that putting a certain particle in a certain position should take a quantifiable amount of work. Just like giving a certain particle a certain momentum takes a quantifiable amount of work. The more precise you want to be, the more energy it will take.  In other words, the lower your tolerance is, or the smaller your target area, the more work will be required.

Depending on the temperature, a particle won't just be at a position.  It will be within a certain range a certain percentage of time. And how will we know  whether it is within range?  There is no way to measure for sure... Many of the measurements will be inaccurate and will create the same issues of quantum measurement we often see.  This means that we will never be 100% sure that it is in our target area.  We can only have a certain confidence.

Back to the question of quantifying the amount of energy that information can make available.  When we subdivide the state space into more possible configurations, we increase the information.  Just by decreasing the number of microstates we describe with each macrostate, we're decreasing the $$ST$$ term of the energy equation.  But the total energy doesn't decrease.  Free energy increases.  This means we have to describe this information in some other way.  If we have a system composed of a container with 3 particles, and consider the rest of the system to be a normal ideal gas, we add the information we have about the 3 particles, and then add the abstracted information from the rest.  In this case in our system description, we have "names" for the 3 particles we're considering ourselves to have information on.  The rest of the particles are unnamed.

As we observe more about the system, we can name more and more particles.  However, rather than name actual particles, we could name sets of particles.  This will reduce the amount of entropy for each macrostate.  We should also be able to name "portions" of particles.  If a given particle has a velocity vector which is made up of various components from various causes we should be able to abstract these out and "name" these contributions in the equation as long as we make a corresponding adjustment in the aggregated/abstracted $$ST$$ term.  This could be useful for a system with some magnetic particles whose motion is described partially due to magnetic forces as well as other forces.  One could identify a contributor to the probability distribution of the particles while maintaining the unknown aspects of the particle as unidentified.

If 1 of these "named" components described the total energy of the system perfectly, we would say that that component is 100% correlated to the distribution described through that "naming."  This would mean the mutual information would be exactly equal to the total calculated gibbs entropy of the system.  In that case there would be 0 entropy however, because the "named" components of the system should wholly describe the kinetic energy distribution, so the $$TS$$ term is 0, and the energy would be a consequence of the energy state described by the hypothesized distribution. This should never happen, so we will always have some of the $$TS$$ term left.

We can hypothesize a distribution and measure the mutual information between our hypothesized and observed distributions.  The mutual information that is created through this observation can be viewed as a form of entanglement with the observeer, which causes wavefunction collapse.